Aristotle's First Principles

This page intentionally left blank

Aristotle's First Principles

Terence Irwin

CLARENDON PRESS · OXFORD

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi
São Paulo Shanghai Taipei Tokyo Toronto
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
© Terence Irwin 1988
Published in the United States by
Oxford University Press Inc., New York
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
ISBN 0–19–824290–5

TO GAIL

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
On 5 October 1971, I wrote a short paper on Metaphysics 1004b25–6, for a tutorial with G. E. L. Owen at Harvard.
Since then I have intermittently pursued some lines of inquiry connected with that passage; the current result of them
is this book. The ﬁrst chapter gives a survey of its contents, and some idea of the main argument. I try to explore some
connexions between different areas of Aristotle's philosophy, and to suggest how issues and doctrines in one area may
affect his views in another. Whether or not the main thesis of this book is found convincing, I hope it will seem
proﬁtable to examine some of the connexions I discuss, and to see how they affect our views about the coherence and
plausibility of Aristotle's doctrines.
While I would like to have formed original and convincing views on all the questions I discuss, I cannot claim to have
done this. On many points I rely on views that other people have made quite familiar (though hardly standard, given
the extent of healthy disagreement in the study of Aristotle). On the other hand, though I cover more topics than are
usually covered in a single book on Aristotle, this book is not a general survey; it is quite selective, and it does not
attempt to give a balanced impression of Aristotle as a whole. Still, I hope I have provided enough detail to give the
uninitiated reader some idea of the main questions, and of some of the main approaches to them, and also to give both
the less advanced and the more advanced student some idea of the reasons for my conclusions. While this is not an
introductory book, I hope it will be accessible to reasonably persistent readers who have not read much about
Aristotle, but are willing to read Aristotle fairly closely; in the main text I try not to presuppose familiarity with the
present state of scholarly and philosophical discussion.
The notes discuss some points of detail, and indicate some of my views on issues that have been discussed by other
writers on Aristotle. They come after the main text, on the assumption that many readers will ﬁnd it easier to read the
main text before tackling the issues that are raised in the notes. The general excellence of the ‘secondary literature’ on
Aristotle, extending from the Greek commentators to the present, is unrivalled (as far as I know) by what has been
written on any other philosopher; and therefore I would like to have done more justice to it than I have. The reader
should not anticipate the systematic and judicious selection that would certainly be desirable. I especially regret the
brevity of my discussion of some complex issues and of the views

viii

PREFACE

that have been expressed about them. It will be even clearer to many readers that my account of Aristotle's views raises
many large philosophical questions that I have not pursued very far, and that the positions I do take often leave many
objections unanswered.
I am pleased to be able to acknowledge the award of fellowships from the Society for the Humanities at Cornell
University, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the American Council of Learned Societies. The
generosity of the Warden and Fellows of All Souls College (in 1982–3), and of the President and Fellows of Magdalen
College (in 1987), allowed me to spend a year and a half in Oxford under highly favourable conditions. It was both
beneﬁcial and pleasant to discuss Aristotle with Oxford Aristotelians, especially Michael Woods, Christopher Taylor,
and David Charles.
I have already mentioned Gwil Owen; and readers who know his work (especially Owen [1965]) will see its inﬂuence
throughout this book. Ever since I began to think about Aristotle I have beneﬁted from John Ackrill's candid and
challenging papers and lectures, and from his incisive and encouraging criticisms. I have had the good fortune to teach
in the humane, friendly, and stimulating environment of Cornell philosophy, and hence to learn from other people who
have been here, especially from David Brink, Eric Wefald, Alan Sidelle, Sydney Shoemaker, Henry Newell, Nicholas
Sturgeon, John Fischer, and Richard Boyd. Helpful written suggestions and corrections by David Brink, Jennifer
Whiting, and Susan Sauvé have considerably improved earlier drafts of this book. I have been especially inﬂuenced by
four recent studies of issues in Aristotle: Ide [1987], Whiting [1984], Shields [1986], and Sauvé [1987]. I have been even
more inﬂuenced by the authors of these studies; they have invariably offered acute, constructive, and friendly criticism
and discussion, and they have improved my views on many more points than I could readily identify. Above all, I have
received thorough and relentless criticism, numerous corrections and suggestions, and unwavering help and
encouragement, from Gail Fine.
The Delegates, staff, and readers of the Press have treated this book in the tolerant, efﬁcient, and helpful way that I
have found to be characteristic of them.
T.H.I
Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York
5 October 1987

Contents
Abbreviations
I THE EMERGENCE OF THE PROBLEM
1. The Problem of First Principles
1. First principles
2. Realism
3. Dialectic and philosophy
4. Puzzles about dialectic
5. Aristotle's development
6. Aristotle's conception of philosophy
7. The emergence of the problem
8. Solutions to the problem
9. Applications of the solution
2. Inquiry and Dialectic
10. Aims of inquiry
11. The study of method
12. Ways to ﬁrst principles
13. Empirical starting-points
14. The accumulation of data
15. Induction
16. The evaluation of theories
17. Conclusions on Aristotle's empirical method
18. The functions of dialectic
19. The starting-point of dialectic
20. Dialectical puzzles
21. Dialectical puzzles and the aims of dialectic
22. The construction of a theory
23. The evaluation of dialectical theories
24. The special role of dialectic
25. Questions about dialectic
3. Constructive Dialectic
26. Positive functions for dialectic
27. The nature of the categories
28. Substance and the categories
29. Inherence and strong predication
30. Substance and quality
31. Substance and change
32. Substance and essential properties
33. The anomaly of differentiae
34. The dialectical search for ﬁrst principles

xvii
1
3
3
5
7
8
11
14
15
18
21
26
26
27
29
30
31
32
33
35
36
37
40
42
43
45
48
49
51
51
52
55
57
58
59
61
64
66

x

CONTENTS

4.

5.

6.

7.

35. The role of dialectic
36. The defence of ﬁrst principles
37. General features of change
Puzzles about Substance
38. Substances and subjects
39. Basic subjects
40. Matter
41. Universals
42. The dependent status of universals
43. The independence of ﬁrst substances
44. Weaknesses of dialectic
45. Principles of change
46. Puzzles about unqualiﬁed becoming
47. Matter as substance
48. Form as substance
49. Resulting difﬁculties
The Formal Cause
50. Nature and cause
51. The four causes
52. Causes and ﬁrst principles
53. Form and matter as causes
54. Further difﬁculties about form
55. Disputes about teleology
56. The difference between ﬁnal causation and coincidence
57. The arguments for teleology
58. The basis of the argument for teleology
59. Teleology and necessity
60. Teleology and substance
61. Further developments
Conditions for Science
62. Science and justiﬁcation
63. Science and universals
64. Explanatory properties and basic subjects
65. Explanatory properties and the arguments about substance
66. Natural priority in demonstration
67. Natural priority compared with epistemic priority
68. The case for circular demonstration
69. The rejection of coherence as a source of justiﬁcation
70. The rejection of an inﬁnite regress
71. Foundationalism
72. The status of ﬁrst principles
Puzzles about Science
73. Intuition
74. The doctrine of intuition

67
69
70
73
73
76
77
78
80
82
83
84
87
88
89
91
94
94
95
97
99
100
102
104
105
108
109
112
114
117
117
118
120
121
122
124
125
127
129
130
131
134
134
135

CONTENTS

II

75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.

Intuition and inquiry
Dialectic and justiﬁcation
Criticisms of dialectic
Objections to Aristotle's solution
Intuition and the common principles
Difﬁculties in Aristotle's position
Consequences of Aristotle's position
The unsolved puzzles

SOLUTIONS TO THE PROBLEM

8. The Universal Science
83. The aims of metaphysics
84. Wisdom and scepticism
85. Universal science and the four causes
86. The character of universal science
87. Puzzles about universal science
88. Methodological puzzles
89. Substantive puzzles
90. Puzzles and preliminary questions
91. The possibility of a universal science
92. The object of universal science
93. The universal science contrasted with demonstrative science
94. The universal science contrasted with dialectic
95. The dialectical character of universal science
96. The task of the universal science
9. The science of Being
97. Arguments of universal science
98. The defence of the principle of non-contradiction
99. From non-contradiction to essence and substance
100. The dialectical character of the argument
101. The status of the conclusion
102. Protagoras and the science of being
103. The reply to Protagoras
104. Scepticism and the science of being
105. The reply to scepticism
106. The knowledge of ﬁrst principles
10. Substance and Essence
107. From being to substance
108. The priority of substance
109. Criteria for substance
110. Substance as subject
111. Strategy
112. Subject as matter
113. Further tests for substance
114. Essence and subject

xi
136
137
139
141
143
145
147
148
151
153
153
155
157
159
161
162
163
166
168
170
172
174
175
177
179
179
181
183
185
187
189
190
192
194
196
199
199
200
202
204
206
207
210
211

xii

CONTENTS

115. A revised criterion for substance
116. A preliminary solution of the puzzles
117. Essence as particular
118. Essence as subject
119. The progress of the argument
11. Essence and Form
120. Substance and potentiality
121. Substance and actuality
122. Potentiality
123. Potentiality and possibility
124. Degrees of potentiality
125. Proximate potentiality
126. Conditions for potentiality
127. Potentiality without change
128. Form as actuality
129. Form and matter in deﬁnitions
130. Formal and material essences
131. Types of matter
132. Types of compounds
133. The essence of natural substances
12. Form and Substance
134. Particulars as forms and compounds
135. Particular forms as substances
136. The nature of particular forms
137. The role of particular forms
138. Particular forms and the criteria for substance
139. Particular forms as primary substances
140. Objections to universals as substances
141. The case for universal substances
142. The status of particular substances
143. The difference between universals and properties
144. Particulars and universals as substances
145. The primacy of particular substances
146. Results of the Metaphysics
147. The role of a priori and empirical argument
148. First philosophy and strong dialectic
III APPLICATIONS OF THE SOLUTION
13. The Soul as Substance
149. Aristotle's task
150. Puzzles about the soul
151. The solution
152. The relation of soul to body
153. Answers to puzzles
154. The contribution of ﬁrst philosophy

213
216
217
219
220
223
223
225
226
227
230
231
233
235
237
238
239
241
243
245
248
248
250
252
253
255
257
259
261
263
264
265
268
270
271
274
277
279
279
280
282
284
286
288

CONTENTS

155. Dualism
156. Materialism
157. Empirical argument, dialectic, and ﬁrst philosophy
158. Soul and mind
14. Soul and Mind
159. Perception as a state of the soul
160. Perception as process and activity
161. The accounts of perception
162. Form and matter in perception
163. Realism about perceptible qualities
164. The rejection of realism
165. The infallibility of the senses
166. Complex perception
167. Appearance
168. Appearance and thought
169. Thought
170. Thought and inference
171. Thought, content, and structure
172. The cognitive faculties
15. Action
173. Desire and perception
174. The unity of desire
175. Desire and apparent good
176. Reason and desire
177. Rational desires
178. The scope of deliberation
179. Rational agency and the good
180. The temporal aspects of rational agency
181. Rational agency and responsibility
182. Aspects of responsibility
183. The form of human beings
16. The Good of Rational Agents
184. Moral and political argument
185. The content of ethics
186. The direction of moral argument
187. Tasks for the Politics
188. The aims of the Politics
189. Difﬁculties in political argument
190. Strong dialectic in political theory
191. The ﬁnal good
192. The completeness of the ﬁnal good
193. The self-sufﬁciency of the ﬁnal good
194. Rational agency and the human function
195. Rational agency and human capacities
196. Rational agency and happiness

xiii
290
293
296
299
303
303
305
307
310
311
313
314
315
318
319
320
322
323
325
329
329
330
332
333
334
335
336
338
340
342
344
347
347
349
351
352
354
356
358
359
360
362
363
366
368

xiv

17.

18.

19.

20.

CONTENTS

197. Self-realization
198. Self-realization and human good
The Virtues of Rational Agents
199. Virtue, happiness, and nature
200. Virtue, reason, and desire
201. Concern for a self
202. Self, essence, and character
203. Self-love and self-realization
204. Rational control and self-regarding virtues
205. Degrees of rational control
206. The scope of rational control
207. The defence of common beliefs
The Good of Others
208. Altruism and the moral virtues
209. Friendship and altruism
210. Self-love and altruism
211. The defence of friendship
212. The friend as another self
213. Extended altruism and the moral virtues
214. The extension of friendship
215. The political community and the human good
216. Political activity
217. The complete community
The State
218. Conceptions of the state
219. The human good and the citizen
220. The human good and leisure
221. Leisure as a condition of freedom
222. Aristotle's misuse of his argument
223. Moral education as a task for the state
224. The defence of moral education
225. The apparent conﬂict between freedom and moral education
226. Aspects of freedom
227. The reconciliation of freedom and moral education
Justice
228. General justice
229. The problem of special justice
230. Conditions for just distribution
231. Retrospective justice
232. The relation between general and special justice
233. Errors about justice
234. Political systems and their errors about justice

369
370
373
373
374
376
377
379
381
383
385
387
389
389
390
391
393
395
397
397
399
402
404
407
407
409
411
413
414
416
418
419
421
422
424
424
425
427
428
430
432
433

CONTENTS

235. The effects of errors about justice
236. Answers to puzzles about justice
21. The Consequences of Virtue and Vice
237. The virtues of character
238. The particular virtues and non-rational desires
239. The particular virtues and external goods
240. Virtue and the loss of external goods
241. The supremacy of virtue
242. Vice in a political context
243. The variety of political systems
244. Vice and conﬂict
245. Vice and aggression
246. Vice and slavishness
247. Instability in political systems
248. Virtue and political stability
249. Stability and the middle class
250. The defence of private property
251. Objections to the defence of private property
252. Moral and political theory in Aristotle's system
253. The evaluation of Aristotle's claims
22. Reconsiderations
254. Aristotle's silences
255. The treatment of Aristotle's early works
256. The treatment of Aristotle's late works
257. Strong dialectic
258. The uses of strong dialectic
259. Systematic philosophy in Aristotle
260. Metaphysics, epistemology, and method
261. Defences of Aristotle
262. Dialectic and historical study
Notes
Bibliography
Index Locorum
Index Nominum
General Index

xv
435
437
439
439
441
442
445
447
449
450
451
452
453
456
457
460
462
464
466
468
470
470
472
473
476
477
480
482
483
485
487
642
661
684
688

This page intentionally left blank

Abbreviations
Works of Aristotle and other ancient authors are cited by abbreviated titles; full titles are given in the Index Locorum.
Aristotle is cited by the standard pages and lines of Bekker [1831]. I have used the editions in the Oxford Classical
Texts, or, when these are not available, in the Teubner series. The Greek commentators on Aristotle are cited by page
and line from the relevant volume of Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca (fuller reference in Index Locorum).
Other works are cited in the Notes by author's name and date. The date is normally that of the original publication; but
the pagination is taken from the source cited ﬁrst after the author's name. Works by two or more authors (or with two
or more editors) are usually cited by the name of the alphabetically ﬁrst author. Standard works (e.g. commentaries)
cited frequently in a particular chapter are often cited by author's name alone, without a date. Well-known
philosophical texts (e.g. Hume, Kant) are cited by author and abbreviated title, and the edition used is listed in the
Bibliography.
Abbreviations used in the Notes and Bibliography are as follows:
AA
AGP
CJP
CQ
CR
DK
EAE
HPQ
IA
JHI
JHP
JHS
JP
KS
OCT
OSAP
OT
PAS
PBA
Phil.
Phr.

Articles on Aristotle (see Barnes [1975a]
Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
Classical Quarterly
Classical Review
Diels [1952]
Essays on Aristotle's Ethics (see Rorty [1980])
History of Philosophy Quarterly
Index Aristotelicus (see Bonitz [1870])
Journal of the History of Ideas
Journal of the History of Philosophy
Journal of Hellenic Studies
Journal of Philosophy
Kant Studien
Oxford Classical Texts
Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy
Oxford Translation (see Smith [1910])
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the British Academy
Philosophy
Phronesis

xviii
PAS
PBA
Phil.
Phr.
PQ
PR
PS
RM
ROT
SPAS
SVF

ABBREVIATIONS

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the British Academy
Philosophy
Phronesis
Philosophical Quarterly
Philosophical Review
Philosophical Studies
Review of Metaphysics
Revised Oxford Translation (see Barnes [1984])
Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume
Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta (see Von Arnim [1905])

I The Emergence of the Problem

This page intentionally left blank

1 The Problem of First Principles
1. First Principles
When Aristotle explains in general terms what he tries to do in his philosophical works, he says he is looking for ‘ﬁrst
principles’ (or ‘origins’; archai):
In every systematic inquiry (methodos) where there are ﬁrst principles, or causes, or elements, knowledge and science
result from acquiring knowledge of these; for we think we know something just in case we acquire knowledge of the
primary causes, the primary ﬁrst principles, all the way to the elements. It is clear, then, that in the science of nature
as elsewhere, we should try ﬁrst to determine questions about the ﬁrst principles. The naturally proper direction of
our road is from things better known and clearer to us, to things that are clearer and better known by nature; for the
things known to us are not the same as the things known unconditionally (haplôs). Hence it is necessary for us to
progress, following this procedure, from the things that are less clear by nature, but clearer to us, towards things
that are clearer and better known by nature. (Phys. 184a10–21)1
The connexion between knowledge and ﬁrst principles is expressed in Aristotle's account of a ﬁrst principle (in one
sense) as ‘the ﬁrst basis from which a thing is known’ (Met. 1013a14–15). The search for ﬁrst principles is not peculiar
to philosophy; philosophy shares this aim with biological, meteorological, and historical inquiries, among others. But
Aristotle's references to ﬁrst principles in this opening passage of the Physics and at the start of other philosophical
inquiries imply that it is a primary task of philosophy.2
It is easy to see why Aristotle says we should begin with what is better known and more familiar to us (EN 1095a2–4);
we have to begin with the beliefs we initially accept. But his account of the goal of inquiry is more puzzling. He
suggests that the ﬁrst principles are known and clearer ‘by nature’ or ‘unconditionally’, even if they are less well-known
and less clear to us. Aristotle explains the point by analogy. Someone may be a ‘natural musician’, because he is
naturally suited for it, even if he never learns music, and so never becomes a musician: ‘And presumably what is known
unconditionally is not what is known to everyone, but what is known to those in a good intellectual condition, just as
what is unconditionally healthy is what is healthy for those in a

4

CHAPTER 1 § 1

good bodily condition’ (Top. 142a9–11; cf. EE 1235b30–1236a6, 1237a16–18).3 First principles are known
unconditionally because they are naturally appropriate for being known.4 The beliefs we begin with are ‘prior to us’
(i.e. ‘prior from our point of view’), since they are what we begin from; but the principles we ﬁnd will be ‘prior by
nature’, and when we have found them they will also be ‘prior to us’; for then we will recognize that they are more
basic and primary than the principles we began from.5
The ﬁrst principles we ﬁnd will include beliefs and propositions. But Aristotle also regards things—non-linguistic, nonpsychological, non-propositional entities—as ﬁrst principles. We come to know, e.g., that there are four elements, and
this proposition that we know is a ﬁrst principle; but the four elements themselves are also ﬁrst principles and are prior
and better known by nature. Actually existing things are ﬁrst principles because they explain other things, and our
knowledge of the world requires us to know the explanatory relations in it. To have scientiﬁc knowledge (epistêmê)
about birds is to be able to explain why birds are as they are and behave as they do. The things and processes that
explain others are basic and fundamental; when we have found them, we have found the ﬁrst principles of birds. What
is prior and better known by nature is both the propositional principle about, e.g., atoms, and the real principle
mentioned in the proposition—the atoms themselves. We grasp both sorts of principles at the same time and in the
same way.6
It is intelligible that when Aristotle speaks of ﬁrst principles, he speaks indifferently of propositions and of the things
they refer to. For the relations between non-propositional things in the world, not the relations between our beliefs,
make one rather than another proposition a ﬁrst principle. We grasp propositional ﬁrst principles, and they become
‘known to us’, when our beliefs match the appropriate propositional principles that match the appropriate nonpropositional principles. Once we believe a propositional ﬁrst principle, we certainly connect it to our other beliefs in
speciﬁc ways; but the beliefs and the connexions do not make it a ﬁrst principle. It is a ﬁrst principle because of the
facts external to our beliefs, and we have the correct beliefs in the correct connexions only in so far as we describe the
relations between facts independent of our beliefs. Let us say that in so far as we do this, we grasp ‘objective’
(propositional) ﬁrst principles describing the (non-propositional) ﬁrst principles of an objective reality.7

CHAPTER 1 § 2

5

2. Realism
In so far as Aristotle claims that objective ﬁrst principles must be known by nature, he commits himself to a
metaphysical realist conception of knowledge and reality. For he claims that the truth and primacy of a propositional
ﬁrst principle is determined by its correspondence to non-propositional ﬁrst principles. What is ‘known by nature’ is
not something that happens to be adapted to our cognitive capacities, or to play a special role in our theories or beliefs.
It is known by nature because it is a primary feature of the world, and it is known to us only if we are in the right
cognitive condition to discover what is really there. The belief we hold when we are in the right sort of cognitive
condition does not itself constitute our grasp of an objective ﬁrst principle; for it is logically possible for us to have
coherent, simple, powerful, well-tested theories, meeting all the canons of proper inquiry, without having found
objective principles. The primacy of the objective principle makes our belief the grasp of a principle, not the other way
round.
Aristotle's remarks about truth show his commitment to metaphysical realism. If you were sitting, and now stand, the
statement ‘You are sitting’ was true, and became false; but he denies that the statement itself has undergone change (of
the ordinary sort); he prefers to say that a statement or belief remains unchanged, but receives a different truth-value
(the respect in which it is said to change) because the things themselves change (Catg. 4a21–37).
This might be construed as a commonsense remark with no great theoretical signiﬁcance. But in fact it rests on
Aristotle's more general conviction that the facts about the world determine the truth of statements, but the converse
is not true.
In the cases where two things reciprocate in implication of being, still, if one is in some way the cause of the being
of the other, it would reasonably be said to be naturally prior. And clearly there are some cases of this sort. For that
there is a man reciprocates in implication of being with the true statement about it; for if there is a man, the
statement by which we say there is a man is true, and this reciprocates—for if the statement by which we say there
is a man is true, there is a man. Nonetheless, the true statement is in no way the cause of the thing's being 〈i.e. of
its being the case that there is a man〉 whereas the thing appears in a way the cause of the statement's being
true—for it is by the thing's being or not being that the statement is said to be true or false. (Catg. 14b11–23)
The asymmetry in explanation described here is taken to be a deﬁning feature of truth about objective reality.8 In
claiming that truth is correspondence to the facts, Aristotle accepts a biconditional; it is true that p if and only if p. But
he ﬁnds the mere biconditional inadequate for the asymmetry and natural priority he ﬁnds in the relation of

6

CHAPTER 1 § 2

correspondence; this asymmetry is to be captured in causal or explanatory terms (cf. Met. 1051b6–9).
Aristotle does not say much to clarify the explanatory asymmetry he has in mind here; he takes it to be readily
understood and accepted. In Metaphysics iv he defends some aspects of the realist assumption, against Protagoras and
against radical sceptics. But even then it is difﬁcult to say how much he still takes for granted. He assumes that not
everything is relative to appearances or beliefs (Met. 1011a17–20), and that facts about the world must explain facts
about perception, not the other way round (1010b30–1011a2).9 His assumptions about the natural priority and
explanatory asymmetry involved in truth are pervasive, but not fully explained.
Aristotle speaks as though anyone with the normal beliefs about truth is committed to his realist assumptions. He
assumes that truth is the appropriate sort of correspondence to the facts, and that the only appropriate sort of
correspondence is the one that involves explanatory asymmetry and natural priority. We think p's being true is a
different property from p's being believed by someone; and, in Aristotle's view, we do not ﬁnd an appropriately
different property unless we assume the particular sort of correspondence that he has in mind.
He answers only the fairly crude Protagorean attempt to show that a property that is recognizably truth can be
understood and explained without a realist assumption. Many more subtle successors of Protagoras have thought they
could succeed where he failed. An alternative strategy might concede that Aristotle is right about the ordinary concept
of truth and the property it ostensibly picks out, and might then try to show that this concept can safely be abandoned
in favour of some substitute that avoids commitment to any realist assumptions.
One reason for rejecting realist assumptions about truth results from their epistemological difﬁculties. For Protagoras,
as for his subtler successors, metaphysical realism seems both to leave room for scepticism and to leave no escape
from scepticism; it often seems difﬁcult to see how we could be justiﬁed in believing anything of the sort that could
meet metaphysical realist conditions. Aristotle's views on truth and natural priority impose a stringent test on anyone,
including Aristotle himself, who claims to ﬁnd objective ﬁrst principles. We need to give some reason for believing that
we have described a state of affairs with properties that explain, and are not explained by, the properties of our beliefs,
theories, assumptions, or habits of mind.10
We must, therefore, if Aristotle is right, show that our ﬁrst principles cannot be explained in the way Hume offers to
explain some alleged principles, as results of the tendency of the mind to spread itself on objects.11 In Hume's view, we
tend to attribute features to objects

CHAPTER 1 § 3

7

because of facts about ourselves and our mental habits; and if we can show this about a putative ﬁrst principle, then it
does not meet Aristotle's conditions for being an objective ﬁrst principle. To have good reason for believing we have
found a ﬁrst principle, we must have good reason for believing that the Aristotelian rather than the Humean direction
of explanation is the right one in this case.
For these reasons, Aristotle is not stating a platitude or a triviality when he claims that philosophy proceeds from things
known to us to things known by nature. His claim, as he interprets it, implies that inquiry must reach objective ﬁrst
principles satisfying metaphysical realist conditions. In claiming that progress is required, he assumes that we lack a
natural intuition of the objective principles at the beginning of our inquiry, and that a reasonable question arises about
whether any of our initial beliefs is an objective ﬁrst principle or not. And since the (non-propositional) things known
by nature must be naturally prior to our beliefs, and must explain their truth, philosophical inquiry must eventually give
us good reason for believing we have found (propositional) principles describing such things, if it is indeed a road
towards ﬁrst principles.

3. Dialectic and Philosophy
In speaking of Aristotle's philosophical works and arguments, I have been referring fairly loosely to those that we
would normally count as philosophical, as opposed to his more detailed empirical inquiries. Aristotle himself takes
‘dialectical’ argument to be the characteristic and distinctive feature of the works that strike us as philosophical; and in
describing them this way, he expresses his view of the nature and status of these arguments.
‘Dialectic’ (dialektikê) is Plato's name for the sort of systematic discussion (dialegesthai) that is practised in Plato's
Socratic dialogues (dialogoi). Socrates discusses common beliefs about ethical questions through a conversation that
involves the systematic cross-examination of an interlocutor and his intuitive beliefs, exposure of the puzzles they raise,
and several attempts to solve the puzzles by modifying the initial beliefs.12 In the Socratic dialogues the discussion often
ends in puzzlement and apparent confusion. But in the Protagoras and Gorgias, and in many later dialogues, Plato does
explicitly what he does implicitly in the earlier dialogues, using the Socratic method to argue for positive philosophical
positions; he regards dialectic as the primary method of philosophical inquiry.13
For Aristotle as well as Plato, dialectic remains closely connected with

8

CHAPTER 1 § 4

the Socratic conversation. The Topics is a handbook for the conduct of such conversation—both its procedural rules
and the philosophical doctrines that are most generally appropriate in arguments on a wide variety of issues. A Socratic
conversation need not aim at positive philosophical progress; we might undertake it simply to see how many
reasonable difﬁculties can be raised for a particular position, or for a particular speaker's defence of it. But Aristotle
retains Plato's belief that dialectic is also a method for reaching positive conclusions; this is why he claims that it has a
road towards ﬁrst principles (Top. 101b3–4).14
The constructive role of dialectic is not as obvious in Aristotle as it is in Plato, because the surviving works do not
present his argument in the form of Socratic dialogue. They are not conversations with several speakers, but
continuous treatises in which the author appears, as Plato never does in the dialogues, in his own person. Still, this
difference in presentation does not reﬂect a basic difference in method. Aristotle's works show their dialectical
character by their conformity to the rules of the Topics, and ultimately to the pattern of the Platonic dialogues.15
Aristotle intends such works as the De Anima, the Physics, and the Ethics to fulﬁl the claims made in the Topics for the
constructive uses of dialectic.

4. Puzzles About Dialectic
If dialectic has a road to objective ﬁrst principles, then Aristotle's dialectical arguments should give us some reasonable
grounds for conﬁdence that they lead us to objective principles that are prior and better known by nature. But at this
point a serious difﬁculty arises. Aristotle's description of dialectical method seems to offer no grounds for believing
that it systematically reaches objective ﬁrst principles. It examines commonly held beliefs (endoxa), and if it is successful,
it reaches a more coherent version of the beliefs we began with, solving the puzzles revealed by our examination of the
initial beliefs. But coherence within common beliefs does not seem to be a ground for claiming to have found objective
principles.
This difﬁculty leads into the central issues that I discuss in this book. The basic issue is quite simple, and arises about
any philosopher; we have to compare the philosopher's method with the ostensible conclusion of the arguments, and
see if the method is powerful enough to justify belief in the conclusion. Two speciﬁc versions of this basic issue apply
especially to Aristotle.
First, metaphysical realism has often seemed hard to accept because it seems hard to combine with any reasonable
epistemological position.

CHAPTER 1 § 4

9

Realists must allow the logical possibility of the truth of scepticism, since they take truth to consist in the
correspondence of beliefs to some reality that is logically independent of them; this logical independence implies the
logical possibility that all our beliefs are false, and therefore leaves logical room for the sceptical doubt to be correct.
Any justiﬁcation appealing to coherence between beliefs seems to leave room for sceptical doubt; and it has sometimes
seemed that only beliefs immune to doubt could be reasonable foundations for realist claims. The search for beliefs
immune to doubt leads naturally to a foundationalist conception of justiﬁcation, according to which all inferential
justiﬁcation depends on beliefs that are non-inferentially justiﬁed and self-evident.16 It is by no means obvious that this
is a satisfactory epistemological position, either in itself or as a companion to metaphysical realism. But it is easy to
suppose that a conception of justiﬁcation as coherence suits a conception of truth as coherence among beliefs, and that
a conception of truth as correspondence (interpreted in realist terms) requires a foundationalist conception of
justiﬁcation.
Second, any dialectical method of philosophical argument seems to raise questions about the status of its conclusions.
Philosophers have often thought it reasonable to appeal to ‘what we intuitively believe’ or ‘what we ﬁnd it natural to
say’, and they think the philosopher's task is to give the most coherent account of these intuitive beliefs. Critics of this
method often ask why our intuitive beliefs should be taken as norms of reasonable belief, and why we should be
especially concerned to ﬁnd a coherent account of intuitive beliefs. Perhaps the results of scientiﬁc inquiry will
challenge our initial intuitive beliefs, and will lead us to say things we initially found unnatural; but why should that lead
us to prefer our initial beliefs over the conclusions of science? The use of dialectical philosophy seems to be severely
limited; we seem to have no reason to claim that it leads us to the truth. Even if we agree that some sort of coherence
among beliefs is a reasonable basis for claims to knowledge, dialectical philosophy seems to overestimate intuitive
beliefs.
Each of these two speciﬁc issues about methods and conclusions might arise without the other. But they are especially
acute in Aristotle, since he seems to face the worst of both worlds. Since he is a realist in metaphysics, but practises
dialectical philosophy, the apparent gap between his method and his conclusions should be quite striking, and should
raise some questions for us, whether or not Aristotle sees them himself.
In fact he does see some of the questions. Indeed he insists on the limits of dialectic, in order to contrast it with
demonstrative science. Science, as opposed to dialectic, is supposed to rely on objective ﬁrst

10

CHAPTER 1 § 4

principles, and to expound their consequences; it claims the sort of objectivity that (in his view) dialectic cannot
justiﬁably claim.
We might suppose, then, that even if Aristotle is wrong about dialectic, that does not matter much, because the task of
ﬁnding objective ﬁrst principles and showing that we have found them really belongs to demonstrative science. But
this solution fails: for it is not clear how Aristotle can show that any discipline meets the conditions he imposes on
scientiﬁc knowledge. Each Aristotelian science must assume, but cannot prove, the objective truth of its own ﬁrst
principles, and apparently no scientiﬁc argument can show that the principles themselves are objectively true.17
These different claims about dialectic and science add up to a puzzle about dialectic, and a more general puzzle about
ﬁrst principles. Aristotle claims that dialectic has a road to ﬁrst principles, but seems to imply that, because it depends
on common beliefs, it cannot reach ﬁrst principles. Further, he claims that a science must rest on objective ﬁrst
principles; but he cannot explain how we are justiﬁed in believing that it has found them.
Aristotle believes, however, that he can argue for the objective truth of ﬁrst principles; and in Metaphysics iv he
introduces a science that claims to argue for the ﬁrst principles of the other sciences; and this science differs from
dialectic in so far as dialectic relies on common beliefs, and this science relies on objective truths. This universal
science, called ‘the science of being’ or ‘ﬁrst philosophy’, seems to remove the difﬁculties that we raised about dialectic.
On the other hand, further difﬁculties now arise: (1) In his earlier works Aristotle seemed to reject the possibility of the
sort of universal science that he accepts in the Metaphysics. (2) The method of the universal science looks suspiciously
similar to the method of dialectic, which seemed unable to reach the objective ﬁrst principles that universal science is
supposed to reach.
These difﬁculties about the Metaphysics raise my main questions. Has Aristotle really found a reasonable conception of a
universal science that answers his own objections? Does he show that the objections against dialectic do not affect the
universal science? Most of this book is devoted to showing how these questions arise, to defending an afﬁrmative
answer to each of them, and to exploring the implications of the answers. These are initially questions about Aristotle's
method; but they raise wider issues about his philosophical development, and about the structure and plausibility of his
doctrines. I will therefore pause to explain the connexion between the questions about method and these wider issues.

CHAPTER 1 § 5

11

5. Aristotle's Development
Ancient and mediaeval students of Aristotle read his works as though the order of composition did not matter,
assuming that they all expound the same system. Commentators freely illustrate remarks in one work by appeal to
another work, on the assumption that the second work will always express the general view that Aristotle had in mind
in writing the ﬁrst. In the particular case that concerns us, commentators readily expound Aristotle's remarks about
dialectic, science, and ﬁrst principles in the light of his doctrines about universal science in the Metaphysics. They do not
even raise the possibility that Aristotle might hold different views in different works.18
In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, by contrast, the study of Aristotle has been heavily inﬂuenced by questions
about Aristotle's development; students normally regard it as a possibility to be taken seriously, even though they
disagree about how much difference it makes. It has generally been thought useful to trace the development of Plato's
thought; and some students of Aristotle have wanted to do the same thing for him. So far, however, these efforts have
not resulted in even the limited degree of fairly widespread (but by no means universal) agreement that has been
reached for Plato. Most students (going back at least to Aristotle) at least distinguish Plato's early ‘Socratic’ dialogues
from his middle and later dialogues; but there is no similar agreed division in Aristotle's works.
Some have suggested that since Aristotle spent the ﬁrst twenty years of his philosophical career in Plato's Academy, he
is likely to have agreed with Plato, and likely to have moved away gradually from Platonic views.19 I will not discuss this
view of Aristotle's development, since I think it has been refuted. There is no evidence that Aristotle was ever a disciple
of Plato (in the sense of accepting all the main philosophical doctrines discoverable from Plato's dialogues), or that his
later works are less Platonic than his earlier.20
A more plausible picture of Aristotle's development suggests that his earlier philosophical views are the product of his
criticisms of Plato, resulting from actual debate in the Academy; further reﬂexion on Plato led him, in later works, to
form a more sympathetic view of some of Plato's views and doctrines.21 Like the ﬁrst picture, this picture presents a
philosopher dominated by his teacher; whereas the ﬁrst picture presents a young disciple gradually bringing himself to
differ with his teacher, the second portrays the ﬁerce young critic gradually reaching a more balanced view of the views
he initially criticized.
Each picture has parallels in the careers of other philosophers; and we lack the biographical evidence to decide
between them. But I think the

12

CHAPTER 1 § 5

second picture is much nearer the truth. There are no Platonizing early works (as the ﬁrst picture would suggest), but
in works that are plausibly (on different grounds) regarded as earlier, Aristotle's position is further from Plato's on
some important points than it is in some probably later works.
My objection to this second picture is not exactly that it attributes to Aristotle, as the ﬁrst picture does, speciﬁc views
that he does not hold, but that it probably exaggerates the extent to which Aristotle consciously reacts against Plato. To
this extent, the suggestion that he formed his views in dialectical debate in the Academy seems to me to overlook the
probable independence of Aristotle's own reﬂexion on philosophical problems.22 I see no good reason to believe that
he spent most of his time deciding whether to agree or disagree with Plato, and hence I doubt if attention to debates
with Plato or Platonism is likely to explain his philosophical development. I am inclined to think the comments on
Plato are an incidental result of Aristotle's reﬂexion on problems that arise for him apart from any Platonic context.
Indeed, it is useful to examine Aristotle's reaction to Plato precisely because Aristotle is aware of questions about Plato
that he would probably never have noticed if he had conﬁned himself to thinking about Plato.
Though I do not intend to discuss Aristotle's development in full, the question arises for me, as it does not for some
other recent writers on Aristotle, because I think some attention to his probable development throws some light on the
doctrine of different treatises. This is not everyone's view. The developmental schemes that have been proposed have
been applied to particular Aristotelian works in ways that have not been wholly convincing; and attempts to discover
chronological layers have often rested on appeals to alleged contradictions that turn out not to be contradictions at all
once we understand the argument better.23 Justiﬁed scepticism about the results of developmental schemes has moved
some contemporary students to set aside questions of development, and to return to a more traditional ‘static’ view of
Aristotle. Such a static view is no less probable a priori than either of the developmental pictures; and if we accept it as
a working hypothesis, it has some useful results.
If we assume a static view, we will try to see how two allegedly inconsistent doctrines are really consistent, instead of
giving up prematurely and assigning them to different stages in Aristotle's development. Equally, different treatises may
have different aims that make it reasonable to expound a doctrine in more or less detail, and with greater or less
precision; and this explanation of an apparent disagreement is often more reasonable than an assumption about
development. In any case, philosophers sometimes hold inconsistent views, since not

CHAPTER 1 § 5

13

all inconsistencies are obvious; even if we cannot dissolve the appearance of contradiction, we should not necessarily
explain it by development.
I agree that these warnings against premature appeals to development are salutary correctives to some tendencies in
Aristotelian studies; and for these reasons I think the static view is prima facie plausible. Still, in some cases the
presumption in its favour can be overcome; and I would like to show that Aristotle's views on some issues suggest a
hypothesis about development. I discuss two major issues where I think Aristotle changes his mind: (1) As I suggested
above, Aristotle's earlier works seem to reject the possibility of a universal science, and the Metaphysics accepts such a
science. (2) The account of substance in the central books of the Metaphysics seems to differ from the account in the
Organon and in some of the treatises on natural philosophy.
If we reject a developmental account of these differences, we must try one of two static solutions. We may either (a)
show that the ‘earlier’ and ‘later’ accounts are really consistent, and that it is not surprising that they should be
expressed in different terms in different works; or (b) agree that the two accounts are inconsistent, and argue that
Aristotle might well have left the inconsistency unresolved. I will be satisﬁed if I can give reasons for rejecting the ﬁrst
static solution. It is far harder to decide between the second static solution and a developmental solution. But it is also
far less important; for the second static solution agrees with the developmental solution about the philosophical
signiﬁcance of the arguments, and differs only about Aristotle's attitude to them. I will simply try to suggest why a
developmental explanation is reasonable, and why it is at least not simply the result of error about Aristotle's views and
arguments.
I mention these two particular issues about development because I think they are connected. I want to show that the
major difﬁculties in Aristotle's earlier doctrine of substance result from speciﬁc features of his dialectical method; that
the conception of universal science in the Metaphysics differs from dialectic on these speciﬁc features; and that this
difference in method suggests revisions that remove the difﬁculties in the doctrine of substance. It is not a coincidence,
in my view, that Metaphysics iv introduces a new account of universal science and Books vii–ix introduce a new account
of substance; I would like to show that the two accounts are part of a fairly continuous argument. On these central
issues of method and doctrine, I hope to show that Aristotle's changes of mind are both intelligible and reasonable.

14

CHAPTER 1 § 6

6. Aristotle's Conception of Philosophy
I suggested earlier that in the works we naturally regard as philosophical Aristotle regards his method as dialectical. If,
then, he introduces the universal science of ﬁrst philosophy to correct the apparent limitations of dialectic, he should
revise his conception of philosophical argument. The issue about dialectic and ﬁrst philosophy should tell us
something about Aristotle's view of philosophy.
Aristotle's ‘purely dialectical’ conception of philosophy has two striking features that he later reconsiders. First,
philosophy is not a rival to the empirical sciences, and is not, as Plato conceived dialectic, the queen of the sciences.
Aristotle wants to avoid any suggestion that dialectic can settle scientiﬁc questions non-empirically. It prevents errors
that might result from confused thinking, on scientiﬁc or non-scientiﬁc questions; and to this extent Aristotle's view
might seem similar to the view of those who regard philosophy as primarily a means of avoiding conceptual
confusions. If we are tempted to overlook the fact that a word is being used in different senses, or that someone has
afﬁrmed the consequent of a conditional on the strength of the truth of the whole conditional, experience in dialectic
will help us to detect these errors.
Secondly, the contrast between dialectic and science might suggest that Aristotle accepts the fairly common view that
philosophy is less objective than science. If we are willing to claim that the sciences tell us about an objective world, we
may still be unwilling to say the same for philosophy. Perhaps philosophy can clarify our beliefs, remove confusions,
alter our point of view, and so on; but all these results seem distinct in principle from discoveries about the nature of an
objective reality.
On these two points Aristotle's view is recognizably similar to some familiar conceptions of philosophy. He responds
in understandable ways to some rather striking and obvious features of philosophical argument. For all that, his views
ought not to satisfy him, in so far as they conﬂict with his claim (on a reasonable interpretation) that dialectic has a
road to objective ﬁrst principles.
In the Metaphysics, therefore, Aristotle changes his mind on these aspects of dialectical argument. He still believes they
are true of ‘pure dialectic’, which argues indiscriminately from common beliefs. But he now believes in a universal
science that uses dialectical arguments on an appropriately selected subset of common beliefs; and he claims that this
science reaches objectively true conclusions about ﬁrst principles of the other sciences. In his earlier works he follows
the tendency of much of modern philosophy to reduce the objective element in philosophical

CHAPTER 1 § 7

15

claims; but in his later works he accepts the sort of view that many modern philosophers have taken to be open to fatal
objections, some of which Aristotle himself seems to recognize.
If Aristotle's views on ﬁrst philosophy express this change of mind about the nature and limits of philosophy, they raise
persistent and difﬁcult questions that have concerned philosophers with any reasonable degree of self-consciousness
about their discipline.
The claims of universal science are surprising, because they seem to conﬂict both with Aristotle's doctrines and with
the apparent character of the treatises. Aristotle insists on the importance of ‘proper principles’, those special and
appropriate to each area of inquiry.24 This is indeed one of the reasons for his earlier doubts about the possibility of a
universal science. The doubts seem to be reﬂected in the treatises themselves. Most of these seem to be separate
inquiries, not presented as parts of a single system; and Aristotle never appeals directly to a large body of doctrine
derived from a universal science to provide him with the premisses of his arguments in a distinct discipline. Just as
distinct empirical disciplines have their different proper ranges of empirical evidence and their proper principles, each
area of philosophical inquiry has its proper arguments and principles, and Aristotle rejects any attempt at a highly
uniﬁed deductive structure.
On the other hand, not every system has to be the sort that Spinoza (e.g.) hoped to ﬁnd. While it is clear that Aristotle
insists on the distinctness of different disciplines and their principles, it is equally clear that he sometimes relies on the
conclusions of one inquiry in the course of another. If he recognizes a universal science, then the connexions should be
important and pervasive.
At this point an inquiry into Aristotle's methods has to face questions about his substantive doctrines. For if we want
to know whether his views on a universal science are reasonable, we need to know what such a science claims, what
these claims imply for other areas of inquiry, and whether the claims and implications are reasonable. We need to see
whether the principles discovered by ﬁrst philosophy actually improve the rest of Aristotle's philosophical position. I
hope to show that Aristotle has a reasonable view of what ﬁrst philosophy ought to do, and that he actually uses it to
do what he says it ought to do.

7. The Emergence of the Problem
The previous sections should have given some idea of the scope and connexions of the following chapters. I will now
introduce them a little more fully, to indicate the argument that the reader should expect.

16

CHAPTER 1 § 7

The rest of Part I (Chapters 2–7) is really an introduction to Metaphysics iii. There Aristotle prefaces his description of
the universal science of ﬁrst philosophy with a lengthy statement of puzzles and difﬁculties. The relevant puzzles cover
four main areas: (1) Dialectic seems to be the only available method for the discussion of Aristotle's questions, but it
seems not to yield the right sorts of results. (2) We seem to be looking for a universal science, but we have reasons for
believing there can be no such thing. (3) We want the universal science to discuss substance, but we cannot make up
our minds about the appropriate criteria for assessing the claims of different alleged substances. (4) Since we cannot
decide on the right criteria, we cannot decide on the claims of form and matter, which sometimes seem to be rival
candidates for substance.
I intend to follow Aristotle's advice, and to examine the puzzles before attempting to solve them. Aristotle does not
bring up these four puzzles simply as an expository device, or as a list of other people's puzzles and difﬁculties. They
concern him because they arise from his own previous views on the questions. I will argue that readers of Aristotle's
earlier works should feel exactly the sorts of puzzles that Aristotle sets out in Metaphysics iii.
The order I have followed above divides two puzzles about method from two that are primarily about substantive
doctrine. But I want to show that the doctrinal puzzles arise partly because the doctrines are formulated and defended
from a purely dialectical point of view; the weaknesses in Aristotle's method are reﬂected in the limitations of his
doctrines. To bring out this connexion, I discuss the two substantive puzzles (about substance (Chapters 3–4), and
about form and matter (5)) immediately after the discussion of dialectic (2), before examining the contrast between
dialectic and science (6–7).
To raise the puzzles about dialectic, I compare and contrast it with empirical inquiry. Dialectic is similar to empirical
inquiry in so far as it involves progress from things known to us to things known by nature; but it differs from
ordinary empirical inquiry in ways that reveal its attachment to common beliefs and to the puzzles they raise. This
attachment to common beliefs raises some doubts about the capacity of dialectic to reach the objective ﬁrst principles
that are demanded by its constructive functions.
Such doubts about dialectic emerge from a survey of the alleged results of constructive dialectical argument. I
therefore examine Aristotle's general views on substance in the Categories, and his development of these views in Physics
i–ii. He appeals to ordinary dialectical forms of argument, but these seem to betray two weaknesses: (1) They seem too
indeﬁnite to support his speciﬁc conclusions. (2)

CHAPTER 1 § 7

17

Even if they were more deﬁnite, they would show how things seem to common sense, not how they really are.
The account of substance betrays the ﬁrst weakness, since Aristotle argues from intuitive distinctions that do not
support his candidates for substance. Though he appeals to a workable distinction between subjects and things
predicated of them, this distinction does not seem to show that his favoured substances are the only genuine
substances. Aristotle believes that particular men and horses are substances, and that particular musicians are not
substances, in so far as they are composites of a substance (man) and a non-substance (musicality); but it is not clear
that the dialectical distinctions he appeals to really support his discrimination. This difﬁculty becomes important when
he maintains, as he does in the Physics, that form, as opposed to matter, is the primary sort of substance. The
distinctions he relies on seem to make matter at least as good a candidate as form.
This ﬁrst weakness in dialectic would not defeat Aristotle's purpose, if he could give some further reason for advancing
beyond the very general conclusions supported by pure dialectic to the more speciﬁc conclusions about substance that
he actually accepts. He gives no further reason, however, for reaching the more speciﬁc conclusions; and to this extent
he leaves a gap between his dialectical argument and the conclusion he seems to draw from it.
The second weakness in dialectic affects Aristotle's use of his dialectical arguments in the Physics. He speaks as though
dialectic can show that form is substance, that formal and ﬁnal causes are irreducible to purely material causes, and
that therefore a purely materialist approach to natural substances is mistaken. He presents his own views on substance
and cause as successful rivals to the views of Democritus and Plato. But we may well wonder if Aristotle is entitled to
do this. For his opponents claim to describe objective principles and causes, but his dialectical arguments seem to show
at most that his opponents' views conﬂict with common sense. Since his opponents claim to expose the errors of
common sense, they might well be unmoved by being told that their views conﬂict with common sense.
Aristotle speaks as though his claims about formal and ﬁnal causes are true of the world, not just of common beliefs
about the world. But he does not explain how his dialectical argument could give us reason to draw such a conclusion,
or how some other argument ﬁlls the gap left by dialectic.
It is important to see that the apparent gap between dialectic and objective principles is clear to Aristotle himself; and
this point emerges from his account of demonstrative science. For here he shows that he is well aware of the
conditions for knowledge that can claim to grasp

18

CHAPTER 1 § 8

objective principles; and he clearly believes that pure dialectic itself cannot reach principles meeting these conditions.
He insists that the ﬁrst principles of demonstrative science must be grasped in some way that guarantees their objective
truth. Since Aristotle holds a foundationalist conception of knowledge and justiﬁcation, rejecting inﬁnite regresses and
circles as possible sources of justiﬁcation, he concludes that ﬁrst principles must be grasped by some form of intuition
guaranteeing their objective truth. Since dialectic can only achieve coherence among common beliefs, it cannot give us
reason to believe we have found objective ﬁrst principles.
Aristotle makes ﬁrst principles seem hard to reach; for no reasonable method of inquiry seems to support the sort of
claim that would be needed to meet his conditions. Still, the questions he raises are quite reasonable. It seems quite
doubtful that mere coherence between common beliefs could support a claim to have found objective ﬁrst principles;
and if this will not do, we need some answer that avoids the impossible conditions imposed by the doctrine
of intuition.
This problem about objective principles makes it reasonable for Aristotle to place the puzzles about universal science
in their prominent position in Metaphysics iii. For in the Metaphysics he sets out to ﬁnd a scientiﬁc argument for ﬁrst
principles; but his own reﬂexions on science and dialectic seem to assure him that no scientiﬁc argument is available
for ﬁrst principles. This puzzle, like the others, emerges directly out of Aristotle's own arguments; and the arguments in
the earlier works give no hint that Aristotle has any solution up his sleeve when he presents them.

8. Solutions to the Problem
After setting out the puzzles, I turn to Aristotle's solution in the Metaphysics. I do not cover all of this work; and I do
not consider all the arguments that have been given for ﬁnding doctrinal conﬂicts or different chronological layers in it.
But I take seriously the possibility that at least some parts of it present a connected argument that is controlled by the
conception of ﬁrst philosophy set out in Book iv. It must be admitted that Aristotle does not emphasize any continuity
between his arguments about ﬁrst philosophy in Book iv and his arguments about substance in Books vii–ix. But
Books iii–iv regard the discussion of substance as a central task of ﬁrst philosophy, and it is worth asking if the
discussion of substance follows the rules for an argument within ﬁrst philosophy. What, then, are the rules?
In Metaphysics iv Aristotle describes a universal science, called ‘the science of being qua being’ or ‘ﬁrst philosophy’,
whose methods are

CHAPTER 1 § 8

19

neither purely dialectical nor demonstrative, and for which Aristotle's earlier works leave no room. First philosophy
violates Aristotle's earlier prohibition of any scientiﬁc defence of ultimate ﬁrst principles. The only sort of argument
that he allowed for ﬁrst principles was dialectical; and since dialectic is conﬁned to ﬁnding coherence among beliefs, it
could not, in Aristotle's earlier view, offer scientiﬁc arguments.
If Aristotle is to convince us that his second thoughts on philosophy represent an advance rather than a retreat, he
needs to show how his alleged universal science works. It must have some plausible method for selecting the
‘appropriate’ subset of common beliefs for the right sort of dialectical argument. (I will say that such argument belongs
to ‘strong dialectic’.)25 A proper account of ﬁrst philosophy should show why its conclusions meet metaphysical realist
conditions. And if we are convinced on these points, we need to see why they do not conﬂict with the reasonable
degree of empiricism that turns Aristotle against any philosophical pretension to legislate for empirical sciences.
In my view, the method of ﬁrst philosophy is dialectical in so far as it begins from common beliefs and cross-examines
them. But ‘ﬁrst philosophy’ is not just another name for dialectic addressed to a special sort of question. It uses
dialectical arguments with appropriately selected premisses; and the main task in giving an account of ﬁrst philosophy
is to give some idea of how these premisses are to be selected. I argue that the science of being is a universal science in
so far as it describes the features of reality that are necessary for it to be an object of scientiﬁc study at all. In Metaphysics
iv Aristotle describes the two elementary features, arguing that an object of scientiﬁc study must be a substance with an
essence. His arguments against opponents of the Principle of Non-Contradiction, and against subjectivists who deny
the independence of reality from our beliefs about it, explore the necessary features of subjects with essences.
If some dialectical arguments argue from the assumption that there are objects of scientiﬁc study, they do not begin
from common beliefs indiscriminately, and the consequences of this assumption are not just the consequences of any
old set of common beliefs. The consequences of denying this assumption are difﬁcult to accept—so difﬁcult, indeed,
that they make it hard for opponents of the assumption even to formulate their opposition to it coherently. Aristotle
can fairly claim that arguments based on this sort of assumption are both dialectical and not merely dialectical. If ﬁrst
philosophy can offer arguments of this sort, it can defend its claim to be a scientiﬁc discipline distinct from
demonstrative science and from pure dialectic; and it can show why there is scientiﬁc, not merely dialectical, argument
for ﬁrst principles—argument that gives us a reason to believe we have found objectively true

20

CHAPTER 1 § 8

principles. First philosophy, then, seems to offer a method that leads us from things known to us to things known by
nature; and so its conclusions meet the conditions imposed by Aristotle's metaphysical realist demands.
In these ways Book iv offers a general idea of what an argument in ﬁrst philosophy should be like; and the scope of
ﬁrst philosophy will depend on how far this general idea can be applied. I consider in particular whether it can be
applied to Aristotle's arguments about substance in Books vii–ix, and I suggest some points on which we understand
these arguments better if we regard them as arguments in ﬁrst philosophy.
First philosophy allows Aristotle to formulate the puzzles about substance more exactly than he does in earlier works.
In Book iv he argues that science requires subjects with essences; and in vii he argues that the initially confusing variety
of candidates for substance reﬂects our appeals to each of these presuppositions of science. An inquiry into substance
shows what subjects and essences must be like if they are to be objects of scientiﬁc knowledge—what sorts of basic
subject we must recognize, and what their essential properties must be.
I examine Aristotle's inquiry into substance in some detail (though not in enough detail to deal properly with all the
controversies about it), because the details of his argument matter for our account of his method. As I understand him,
Aristotle thinks his early view—that the subject-criterion is correct, and that such things as particular men and trees
satisfy it—is roughly right. But he thinks strong dialectic can both modify his early view and explain the extent to
which it is right. First philosophy explains why the subject-criterion is important, and why we cannot do justice to it
without also doing justice to substance as essence.
On this view, Aristotle uses strong dialectic to support and correct the conclusions of pure dialectic. Other views of the
argument make it harder to attribute such a role to strong dialectic. If we think Aristotle in the Metaphysics regards
species rather than individuals as primary substances, we ascribe to him a much sharper divergence from his earlier
view; the conclusion that God is the only genuine substance departs widely from common beliefs; and if we think
Aristotle's treatment remains aporetic throughout, we must conclude that Aristotle's practice of strong dialectic fails to
solve the puzzles it confronts. I do not say that my view of Aristotle's doctrine is the only one that ﬁts my view of the
role of strong dialectic in Metaphysics vii–ix; but views on these two issues must affect each other, and the task of
comparing different interpretations is correspondingly complicated.
Aristotle eventually reaches the conclusion that substance is form and that the primary substances are particular forms,
as opposed to the

CHAPTER 1 § 9

21

matter constituting them. At ﬁrst sight, his conclusion seems to conﬂict with my efforts to regard his argument as part
of ﬁrst philosophy. For his actual conclusion—that goal-directed natural organisms are the primary substances—seems
to rest on empirical considerations, especially about causation and explanation, that seem distinct from the very general
arguments about being qua being that seemed to belong to ﬁrst philosophy. To see the point of the argument about
substance, we have to see how and why these considerations about explanation are relevant. I mentioned that in the
Physics Aristotle fails to ﬁt these considerations into his dialectical argument; and it is useful to see if he ﬁts them any
better into his conception of ﬁrst philosophy.
To answer these questions, I consider Aristotle's arguments for identifying the essence of some things with their ﬁrst
actuality, a combination of actuality and potentiality, and for identifying this with form. The proper conception of
essence for ﬁrst philosophy identiﬁes something's essential properties with those that explain the rest of its properties
and behaviour; such properties are rightly identiﬁed with a subject's persistent potentialities; and these persistent
potentialities turn out to belong to its form rather than its matter. Hence it is reasonable to identify a basic subject with
a pattern of functional, goal-directed organization, rather than with its constituent material.
If this argument can be shown to be reasonable, then ﬁrst philosophy shows us how to reach a plausible conception of
substance. It does not tell us the answer to some empirical questions we need to answer in order to know what the
substances are, but it tells us what empirical questions are relevant and what we should conclude from the answers to
them. If we have the right conception of ﬁrst philosophy, and the right conception of the argument in the central
books of the Metaphysics, then the argument is a reasonable construction following the rules of ﬁrst philosophy. The
solution can reasonably claim not just to resolve the puzzles about substance, but to resolve the puzzles about how
dialectical conclusions about substance could describe objective ﬁrst principles.

9. Applications of the Solution
To investigate the degree of system in Aristotle's philosophy, I begin from the account of substance, form, and matter
in the Metaphysics, and see what conclusions Aristotle draws from it for his other philosophical inquiries. If the
Metaphysics offers us the possibility of strong dialectic and applies it to general metaphysical questions, how far can it be
applied in Aristotle's dialectical arguments? How many of these arguments are strongly dialectical, or can be defended
by appeal to

22

CHAPTER 1 § 9

strong dialectic? I examine this question by considering the role of strong dialectic in the De Anima, Ethics, and Politics.
These works contain a more or less continuous argument, depending on the conclusions of the Metaphysics, and
defending their principles by strong dialectic. Ethics and politics are two areas where dialectical method seems suitable
both to Aristotle and to us, and at the same time where sceptical objections to dialectic seem well-founded. Strong
dialectic allows Aristotle to defend his moral and political theory against these sceptical objections.
To investigate the inﬂuence of his metaphysics would be a large task, and I have omitted many topics that would be
relevant to that investigation. I do not discuss, for instance, the rest of the Physics, or the details of the biological works.
Nor do I discuss his theology, despite its obvious connexions both with his doctrine of substance and with his ethical
theory—though in fact I do not think these connexions should make very much difference to our view of the nature
of ﬁrst philosophy or ethics.26 I have chosen to discuss the De Anima, Ethics, and Politics, because they share two
features of interest: (1) Their predominant method of argument is dialectical, rather than empirical. (On this point they
differ from the biological works.) (2) They seem to appeal at some points fairly directly to the conclusions of the
Metaphysics about substance, form, and essence. (On this point they differ from the later books of the Physics.) These
two common features allow us to test Aristotle's use of ﬁrst philosophy.
So far I have discussed only the possibility of strong dialectic as a universal, non-departmental science. But this role
suggests further roles for strong dialectic outside the Metaphysics. (1) To defend a dialectical universal science, Aristotle
has to defend strong dialectic; and this defence applies to dialectic even in its more departmental inquiries in physics,
psychology, or ethics. Here also it is worth seeing whether Aristotle relies on premisses that have some claim on our
acceptance apart from common beliefs. (2) One basis for such a claim might be an appeal to ﬁrst philosophy; if it
supports a premiss of our psychological or ethical doctrine, then we have the sort of defence that makes it suitable for
strong dialectic.
The ﬁrst of these possible implications of ﬁrst philosophy is separable from the second; it is logically possible that the
premisses appropriate for departmental strong dialectic are quite unconnected to ﬁrst philosophy. But in fact Aristotle
explores the two implications together, and he is right to think the second is a reasonable way to specify the ﬁrst.
The use of ﬁrst philosophy is most obvious in the De Anima, where Aristotle offers to answer puzzles about the soul
by appeal to his doctrine of substance. He seeks to show that the claims we can

CHAPTER 1 § 9

23

reasonably make about the soul and the body are all captured and explained by his views about form and matter; if we
identify the soul with substance as form, we ﬁnd a reasonable account of the different states, conditions, and events
that are plausibly attributed to the soul. Dialectic helps us to ﬁnd and to explore the puzzles about the soul; but the
conclusion is not a conclusion of pure dialectic. To identify the soul with substance as form is to identify it with
something that we have distinct metaphysical reasons to recognize.
The puzzles that demand a solution from Aristotle are general puzzles about the soul and its relation to the body, and
more speciﬁc puzzles about states of the soul—especially perception, imagination, thought, desire, and action. If his
identiﬁcation of soul with form is a reasonable account of the soul, it should answer both the general and the speciﬁc
puzzles. If we ﬁnd faults in Aristotle's account of different states of the soul, we ought to be able to show that his
theory of the soul is not responsible for these faults; and it would be a further point in its favour if we could show that
a more thorough application of it would avoid these faults. I will examine some faults in Aristotle's views on
perception and thought, and try to explain how they might be avoided by closer attention to the theory that is derived
from ﬁrst philosophy.
Aristotle does not conceal his view that some aspects of his moral and political theory are derived from his account of
the essence of human beings; and he identiﬁes the human essence with the human soul. Both the Ethics and the Politics
begin with general claims about human nature, and seek to derive speciﬁc normative conclusions from these claims. If
Aristotle's account of the soul is itself derived from ﬁrst philosophy, then his moral and political theory rests on
metaphysical foundations. It should be worth our while to see how sound these foundations are, how much Aristotle
tries to build on them, and how much they can reasonably be expected to bear.
These questions are important for our evaluation of the Ethics and its place in Aristotle's philosophical system, because
the Ethics is often regarded as a clear instance of pure dialectic. Here more than elsewhere, Aristotle seems to rely
explicitly on common beliefs, and to seek coherence among them. Those who accept such a method often do so
because they think ethical theory should not try to satisfy metaphysical realist conditions; our aim, on this view, should
not be to describe any independent reality, but simply to reorganize our initial beliefs.27 If Aristotle ought to believe this,
then he is wrong to claim that moral theory describes objective principles.
This issue makes the connexions between ethical theory and ﬁrst philosophy quite important; for they offer Aristotle
the best prospect of a convincing argument to show why ethical theory can reach objective

24

CHAPTER 1 § 9

ﬁrst principles. If common beliefs can be explained, and partly revised, by appeal to an account of human nature and
the human soul, and this account in turn is defensible from ﬁrst philosophy, then the conclusions of dialectical
argument about ethics may claim some support outside the particular ethical common beliefs that are the startingpoints of the argument.
Discussion of the questions about method and argument in the Ethics ought not to neglect the Politics. It throws further
light on the Ethics from several points of view: (1) Aristotle claims that his ethical works are a part of political science,
and he presents the Politics as a continuation of the Nicomachean Ethics. We should at least see if the two works display
any continuous line of argument. (2) The Politics appeals more frequently and more explicitly to Aristotle's conception
of human nature; it conﬁrms our view that this is meant to support important ethical conclusions. (3) The use of
dialectical argument in the Politics raises some general questions about this method of argument.
The questions raised under the third head can in fact be raised as a general complaint about Aristotle's dialectical
arguments. If we conﬁne ourselves to what seems reasonable to the many or the wise, it may seem unlikely that our
conclusions will be startling or radical. A conservative method seems likely to lead to conservative conclusions. This
suspicion about Aristotle seems to be amply conﬁrmed by the character of the Politics, where both dialectical arguments
and metaphysical appeals to human nature seem to support politically conservative conclusions. Aristotle's rather selfassured arguments for the justice of slavery, the inferior political status of women, and the desirability of rule by the
middle class seem to show that there is something wrong with his method of argument.
I examine the Ethics and Politics together in the hope of showing that strong dialectic of the sort practised in Metaphysics
iv offers a reasonable reply to these charges of inherent conservative bias in Aristotle's methods. Appeal to the
conclusions of ﬁrst philosophy allows us to correct some ethical common beliefs, and to vindicate those we decide to
accept; it offers us a partly independent point of view from which we can avoid the biases present in prevailing
opinions. If Aristotle consistently follows this method, he ought not to be open to the objection that he simply reﬁnes
and presents the prejudices of his more conservative contemporaries. But if Aristotle's less plausible conclusions are
not to turn us against his method, or against his metaphysical principles, we ought to be able to show that the correct
use of his method, and the correct interpretation of his metaphysical principles, do not justify the implausible
conclusions that he claims to derive from them. To defend Aristotle's theory against his conclusions, we need to

CHAPTER 1 § 9

25

show that his conclusions rest on errors that cannot be justly held against his theory.
For these reasons, the chapters on the Ethics and Politics are intended to draw together the methodological and the
substantive issues in the previous chapters. I hope to show that it makes a difference to our view of Aristotle's moral
and political argument if we take it to be strong dialectic, not pure dialectic, and that an appeal to ﬁrst philosophy
makes his moral and political theory more plausible than it would be otherwise. In this case our discovery of the unity
in Aristotle's philosophy should encourage us to take his particular theories more seriously.
Indeed, I hope this will be a reasonable conclusion to draw from my argument as a whole. While I cannot hope to
argue fully for each point of interpretation, or to defend Aristotle's philosophical position against all possible, or even
all important, objections, I hope that the cumulative result will seem plausible and interesting enough, both as an
account of Aristotle's position and as a philosophical position, to encourage further discussion of the many issues that
will arise both for the reader of Aristotle and for the philosopher.

2 Inquiry and Dialectic
10. Aims of Inquiry
Aristotle's metaphysical realism implies that a genuine ﬁrst principle is ‘known by nature’, in that it has the right nature
and character to be an appropriate object of knowledge; and it has this character, not because of some fact about us,
but because of the facts about an objective world whose characteristics do not wholly depend on what we believe
about it.1 If Aristotle thinks we can form beliefs that grasp genuine ﬁrst principles, he should describe some method
for forming them, and give us some reason for thinking that the beliefs we have formed by this method really pass
the test.
In fact he describes two methods of inquiry that begin from our initial beliefs and the things we intuitively recognize,
the ‘things known to us’, and claim to reach principles ‘known by nature’. Empirical inquiry begins from perception,
proceeds by induction and generalization, and tests theories by appeal to experience. Dialectical inquiry begins from
common beliefs, proceeds by raising and solving puzzles, and tests theories against common beliefs.
It is useful to distinguish Aristotle's two methods, because they suggest two different ways of passing the metaphysical
realist test for genuine ﬁrst principles. In empirical inquiry, Aristotle relies on naïve realism, in assuming that perception
accurately grasps features of an objective world, and on naïve empiricism, in assuming that empirical inquiry preserves
objectivity in so far as it simply extends, generalizes, and appeals to the data of perception.2 We might fairly criticize
Aristotle for overlooking several questions about the relation between perception, belief, and theory. But at least we
can see how the results of empirical inquiry will count as objective principles if he has the right conception of
empirical inquiry.
Aristotle's view of dialectical methods is less naïve than his view of empirical methods. He does not assume that the
common beliefs that dialectic begins from must be correct, or that we can identify some correct subset of them in
advance of any theoretical assumptions. He recognizes that initial beliefs and proposed principles have to be examined
against each other; and he relies on nothing analogous to his appeal to the data of perception. To this extent his view
of dialectical

CHAPTER 2 § 11

27

inquiry is not open to the criticisms that are justiﬁably raised against his naïvely realist account of empirical inquiry.
Aristotle recognizes that dialectical inquiry is to an important degree non-empirical; and while this contrast is especially
clear if we accept his own over-simpliﬁed view of empirical inquiry, it remains even if our view of empirical inquiry is
less naïve. But once we appreciate the character of dialectical inquiry, it becomes less easy to see how it can reach
objective principles; the naïve realism that supports the objective status of empirical conclusions is not available for
dialectic. Since the characteristic method of Aristotle's philosophical works is dialectical, doubts about dialectic imply
doubts about his philosophical arguments.
In describing some of Aristotle's remarks as ‘naïve’ or ‘over-simpliﬁed’, I am to some extent being unfair. Most of
them are relatively informal and intuitive; they are not meant to discuss or to resolve the more general questions that
we have raised, and it is unfair to criticize them as though they were meant to constitute a philosophical theory. But
their informality does not mean that they have no inﬂuence on him; and it is worth seeing what he takes for granted as
well as what he says about methods of inquiry.

11. The Study of Method
Aristotle recognizes, following Plato, the importance of understanding methods of inquiry and argument (EN
1095a30–b1; cf. Rep. 511a3–c2, Phd. 101c9–102a1). He remarks that his predecessors have gone astray partly because
they have not fully understood their methods and aims (e.g. GC 316a10–14, Met. 992a29–b1). To this extent the
discussions of method are meant to be practically useful.
Aristotle is not simply concerned, however, with the practising inquirer. He also wants us to evaluate different
methods, so that we know what to expect from different branches of inquiry (Pol. 1282a3–7). Competence in such
evaluation is a product of education (paideia), rather than of professional expertise in any special science:
For it is characteristic of the educated person to be able to judge suitably by a good estimate (eustochôs) what is right
or wrong in an exposition. For this is what we take to be characteristic of the generally educated person, and we
think that being educated consists in the ability to do this sort of thing. In this case, however, we regard the same
individual as competent to judge on just about any area, whereas we take 〈the expert in a science〉 to be conﬁned
to some deﬁnite area. . . . Hence it is clear that, in the inquiry into nature as elsewhere, there must be suitable
principles (horoi) by reference to which we will accept the method of proof, apart from whether 〈the conclusion〉
is true or not. (PA 639a4–15)3

28

CHAPTER 2 § 11

From these methodological studies we learn to distinguish appropriate arguments in literary criticism and historical
study from those in mathematics. We learn, for instance, what degree of exactness (akribeia) we should demand from
one or another area of study (EE 1216b40–1217a9, EN 1094b22–1095a2; cf. Met. 995a12–16). In mathematics we
ought not to be satisﬁed with anything less than demonstration, displaying necessary truths as necessary consequences
of ﬁrst principles that are self-evident and naturally prior; but ethics is less exact, and we must not demand
demonstrations there. The educated person is expected to notice this difference.
Since he knows what to expect from a particular branch of study, the educated person also knows what it should
prove, and what it should take for granted. We display lack of education if we appeal to considerations foreign to the
inquiry being undertaken (EE 1217a7–10); Plato's Theory of Forms, even if it were true, would not settle a question
about the difference between two species of ﬁsh. The educated person knows when it is fair to demand a proof and
when it is not (Met. 1006a5–11, 1005b2–5; cf. 1011a6–13), and what type of argument can fairly be asked for (cf. DC
287b28–288a2). He will therefore be able to estimate the performance of a particular branch of inquiry or of
an inquirer.4
The educated person does not simply learn the differences between methods of inquiry. He also learns that some are
better than others, and tries to ﬁnd out if an alleged science meets the right standards for a genuine science. He must
therefore begin with some conception of the right standards.
For the educated person, then, questions about ﬁrst principles will be especially appropriate. A proper science must
rest on ﬁrst principles that are prior by nature to their conclusions. To know if this standard is met, the educated
person must know what sort of judgment might meet it; he must, therefore, be convinced that the conditions for
natural priority are reasonable; for if they are not, there will be no satisfactory account of genuine ﬁrst principles.
Plato regards the evaluation of different theories and their methods of argument as a task for dialectic. The dialectician
understands the different methods of argument appropriate to different questions and disciplines.5 She realizes, as the
mathematicians themselves do not, that they treat their ﬁrst principles as assumptions, and do not raise the further
questions about them that a dialectician ought to raise. Aristotle does not say explicitly that the discipline forming an
educated person's view of other disciplines is dialectic; but this seems the most likely candidate.6
He says that some people ask for demonstrations in the wrong places

CHAPTER 2 § 12

29

because they are uneducated in analytics (Met. 1005b2–5). But what they lack is not the capacity to formulate or (in one
way) to understand deductive arguments of the sort set out in the Analytics, but appreciation of their function and
limits. Such appreciation results from understanding of the kinds of arguments, proofs, and objections that are
appropriate for different sorts of claims; and this understanding is part of competence in dialectic. At any rate,
Aristotle's instructions on dialectical argument include rules about the proper way to challenge, or to leave
unchallenged, ﬁrst principles and the propositions derived from them (Top. 158a31–b8). To this extent, the educated
person relies on principles secured by dialectical argument; and these principles themselves will be open to any
questions that can be raised about dialectical argument in general.
Aristotle's educated person is the intended beneﬁciary of most of his philosophical work. Such works as the Physics,
Generation and Corruption, De Anima, and Posterior Analytics are not addressed primarily to the natural scientist, but to
someone reﬂecting on the nature and assumptions of a natural science. These reﬂexions are pursued to the most basic
level in the Metaphysics, where ﬁrst philosophy pursues systematically the sorts of questions that concern the educated
person reﬂecting on the sciences. Someone who faces the educated person's questions can appropriately begin with the
practice and theory of Aristotle's methods of discovery.7

12. Ways to First Principles
Aristotle's inquiries, described in very general terms, should be ways to reach what is known by nature from what is
known to us. He claims, equally generally, that an inquiry should begin from ‘appearances’, phainomena. But his different
comments on appearances indicate the differences of method.
Sometimes appearances are the empirical evidence collected for a theory:
Most principles of a science are special to it. Hence it is a task for experience to 〈supply the principles〉 about a
given area. I mean, e.g., that it is the task of astronomical experience to supply the principles of astronomical
science; for once the appearances had been adequately grasped, that was the way to ﬁnd astronomical
demonstrations. And the same is true for any other craft or science. Hence, if the facts (huparchonta) about a given
area are grasped, our next task will be to set out the demonstrations readily. For if our inquiry (historia) leaves out
none of the facts that truly hold of things, we will be able to ﬁnd and produce a demonstration of whatever admits
of demonstration, and if

30

CHAPTER 2 § 13

something does not admit of demonstration, to make this evident also. (APr 46a17–27)
Here the appearances are grasped by empirical inquiry, and form the basis for empirical science. The accumulation of
particular appearances results in the discovery of generalizations, and then in demonstrations stating general laws.
Elsewhere, however, the appearances seem to be different, and to play a different role, because they belong to a
different type of inquiry. In discussing incontinence Aristotle says:
We must, as in the other cases, set out the appearances, and ﬁrst go through the puzzles. In that way we must prove,
ideally, the truth of all the common beliefs about these affections of the soul, or, if not of all, of most of them and
the most authoritative (or ‘important’, kuriôtata). For if the difﬁculties are resolved and the common beliefs are left
standing, that is an adequate proof. (EN 1145b2–7; cf. Phys. 211a7)
In this case the appearances are commonly-accepted beliefs (endoxa). Aristotle does not refer to empirical inquiry, or to
the results of experience, or to generalization and demonstration. He speaks of puzzles, and claims that a resolution of
the puzzles is an adequate proof; such a standard of adequate proof was not mentioned in the account of astronomical
appearances and discovery.
These passages suggest some distinction between empirical inquiry and the relatively non-empirical method of
dialectic, two methods of inquiry dealing with two different sorts of appearances. Aristotle claims that dialectic leads to
ﬁrst principles (Top. 101b3–4), but he does not claim to practise dialectic in every inquiry that leads to ﬁrst principles.
In empirical inquiries, especially in the biological works, the path from appearances to principles (cf. PA 646a8–12)
does not seem to rely primarily on dialectical argument. This distinction between dialectical and empirical argument is
admittedly rough, and does not imply that the same work cannot include both types of argument. But it looks plausible
and signiﬁcant enough to guide our discussion.

13. Empirical Starting-Points
Empirical inquiry (historia) begins with the appearances (APr 46a20–1).8 To call something an appearance is to contrast
it, in a particular context at least, with the conclusion of an argument; what appears to us is what we take to be the case
immediately and without reﬂexion.9 By this test all sorts of widely shared common beliefs (endoxa) will count as
appearances; and Aristotle certainly draws on them at the beginning of

CHAPTER 2 § 14

31

his inquiry.10 But he also recognizes a subset of appearances that are especially close to perception; these are immediate
and non-inferential because they are the direct result of perception, not because most people ﬁnd them obvious
without argument.11
A further subset of perceptual appearances consists of ‘what in each case appears authoritatively in accordance with
perception’ (DC 306a16–17).12 But Aristotle does not say that we can distinguish these authoritative sensory
appearances in advance of inquiry. The rule ‘Begin from authoritative appearances’ cannot be a practical guide for the
initial conduct of inquiry, and we cannot assume that we have eliminated false sensory appearances at the start of
inquiry.
But though Aristotle must allow that some of the appearances we begin from are false or misleading, he does not draw
attention to this possibility as often as we might expect.13 Indeed, he appeals quite conﬁdently to appearances, on the
assumption that they are plainly true; he even counts as perceptual some appearances that seem to have a rather
indirect connexion with perception.14
All the appearances relevant to inquiry reﬂect someone's fairly immediate belief. Some are true, some false; some
perceptual, some not; some commonly believed, some not. Aristotle uses them all as starting-points for inquiry, as long
as they are not seen at the outset to be manifestly false. He speaks as though an appeal to appearances were the same as
an appeal to the observed facts; but that is careless of him, since he agrees that the initial appearances include false
ones. If he is entitled to assume that a given subset of appearances record the observed facts, he must have some way
to isolate these veridical appearances before the formation of a theory explaining them.

14. The Accumulation of Data
In fact he tries to isolate the true appearances; for the appearances forming the basis of a theory are not the ones that
we initially accept, but the ones we form as a result of experience (empeiria) and inquiry (historia).15 The inquirer looks
above all for observational evidence, fuller and more accurate than any that has been compiled previously; and the
result of inquiry will be a better grasp of the perceptual appearances, not necessarily of the common beliefs.16
Experience should isolate the appearances that are ‘proper’ or ‘appropriate’ (oikeia) to the subject-matter, so that we
avoid introducing irrelevant considerations.17
A well-conceived inquiry that accumulates experience and discovers the appearances should also advance far enough
beyond common beliefs to ﬁnd the puzzles (aporiai) proper to a particular area of study.18 We

32

CHAPTER 2 § 15

ﬁnd some puzzles by attending to common beliefs and to the opinions of predecessors (e.g. Metr. 342b25–7). But we
must not conﬁne ourselves to these. The careful inquirer is to ﬁnd the puzzles inherent in the subject itself, not simply
those that other people have found (DC 294b6–13; cf. Phys. 263a15–18). A mere survey of what people ﬁnd puzzling
may not disclose what is really puzzling.
The source of our puzzles is empirical ignorance leaving us at a loss to say what happens or why it happens. Some of
these puzzles are easily removed by collection of fairly accessible observations; others are more recalcitrant, and we
need either a theory to explain something, or further appearances to ﬁll the gap in our information. Only experience
can tell us which of the puzzles we feel are genuine puzzles, and which initially non-puzzling things are genuine puzzles
and therefore should puzzle us (GA 755b22–3, 770b28–35, 771b15–19).19
The role of experience and inquiry in the discovery of the appearances shows that ‘appearances’ is to some extent a
misleading term for what Aristotle actually wants. Though the term does not mean ‘observations’ or ‘observed facts’,
these glosses suggest what he wants. The appearances from which a theory should be formed are primarily those that
appear to a trained and experienced observer as the result of systematic inquiry.

15. Induction
Finding the appearances, inquiry, the accumulation of experience, and the discovery of the genuine puzzles do not
seem to be temporally discrete stages of discovery. They all seem to be the same process, whose product is the
possession of the relevant appearances and the awareness of the genuine puzzles. This product, however, is the
precondition of a stage that does seem discrete from the ones we have discussed. Induction (epagôgê) is the method that
Aristotle describes for the approach to ﬁrst principles. It is the right method because induction proceeds from
particulars to universals (APr 68b15–29, APo 92a37–8, Top. 105a13–14); since the things known to us are particulars,
induction can lead us from these to the things known by nature (APr 68b35–7, APo 72b27–30).20 If the things initially
known to us were as universal as the things known by nature, then induction would not be the method that leads us
from one to the other; we would have to argue ‘syllogistically’ (i.e. deductively) (APr 42a3–4, 68b13–14, APo 71a5–9,
EN 1139b26–8).21
If induction is the primary method of discovery, leading from the appearances to their causes, the appearances must be
perceptual, in a

CHAPTER 2 § 16

33

fairly narrow sense. For strictly perceptual judgments might well seem to be particular (‘This is white’ ‘This deer has
antlers’, etc.), but the broader class of appearances includes universal no less than particular judgments, and if Aristotle
were concerned with these, he could not so readily assume that induction, rather than syllogism, leads us from the
appearances to their causes. By focusing on perceptual appearances, he makes it seem that generalization is the main
task in the formation of a theory; and that is why induction is the method of discovery. The task is to consolidate our
particular judgment that this F is G, that F is G and so on, into a universal judgment that Fs are Gs.22
Induction presupposes that experience has sorted out the true appearances from the false. But even correct perceptual
appearances may not be focused on the right properties. A correct view about natural kinds requires revision of
intuitive views (APo 97b7–39, PA 643b9–26, 644b1–8), since it is sometimes difﬁcult to pick out the right similarities
and common features (Top. 157a25–33, 157b3–8, 156b10–17, 160a37–9). To focus on the wrong kinds is to miss the
properties that divide things into genuine kinds by explaining their other properties and behaviour.23 Inductive
generalization must therefore presuppose some explanatory hypothesis about kinds.
Aristotle's suggestion that induction is primarily generalization would be more reasonable if he could justiﬁably assume
that inquiry and experience have already produced perceptual judgments involving the right kinds, and so incorporate
the right explanatory hypotheses. But his description of inquiry and experience justiﬁes no such assumption; these are
preliminary to the formation of a theory, whereas a plausible explanatory hypothesis is likely to be the product of
theoretical assumptions. Aristotle's remarks about induction, and about discovery in general, leave out many of the
most important and most difﬁcult questions.

16. The Evaluation of Theories
A tentative theory should be tested, in Aristotle's view, by comparison with other possible accounts of the appearances.
The simplest test, requiring a theory not to conﬂict with appearances (e.g. Metr. 357b15–23, GC 315a3–4), is
reasonable only if we have sufﬁcient reason to believe that the relevant appearances are true.24 In criticizing people who
hold on to their theories in the face of recalcitrant appearances, Aristotle insists that the appropriate test for a theory is
not its agreement with all appearances, but its agreement with authoritative perceptual appearances:

34

CHAPTER 2 § 16

The result is that though they speak about appearances, they say things that do not agree with appearances. And the
reason for this is that they do not acquire the ﬁrst principles correctly, but want to derive everything from some
predetermined beliefs. For presumably the principles of perceptible things should be perceptible, of eternal things
eternal, or perishable things perishable, and in general the principles should be of the same kind as the subjectmatter. Because of their love of these 〈beliefs〉 they would seem to do something similar to those who maintain
their 〈paradoxical〉 theses; for they are unmoved by any consequences; on the assumption that they have the true
principles. They behave as though it were not right to judge some things by their consequences, and especially by
their end; and whereas the end of productive science is the product, the end of natural 〈science〉 is what in each
case appears authoritatively (kuriôs) in accordance with perception. (DC 306a7–17; cf. GA 760b28–33.)25
In saying that the end or goal of natural science is the appearance, Aristotle presumably means that it is a theory ﬁtting
the appearance.26 The test will give the wrong results unless it is conﬁned to authoritative perceptual appearances.
Though conﬂict with authoritative appearances is sufﬁcient reason for rejecting a theory, avoidance of conﬂict is not
sufﬁcient reason for accepting it. For a theory may be consistent with the actual appearances simply because it says
very little about appearances at all (GA 748a7–11, GC 316a6–10), and so does not evidently conﬂict with them (DC
309a21–7). Aristotle, therefore, requires a theory to ‘yield’ the appearances.27 It should explain them, and show that
they are reasonable or plausible, eulogon.28 A good theory should remove puzzles, by ﬁnding an explanation that makes
the appearances seem more reasonable than others would be in these conditions.
A theory should also ﬁt any new appearances that may be discovered.29 We do the best we can with the appearances we
have available, but it is corrigible in the light of further appearances (GA 767b28–30; cf. 776a9–10).30 Evidently, these
new appearances are not common beliefs; indeed, the very fact that they are not commonly believed makes it necessary
to inquire for them and makes them a useful test of a theory that accommodates the presently available appearances.31
These tests of a theory rely on our capacity to identify the authoritative perceptual appearances, to recognize a bad
explanation (if we are testing someone else's theory), and to ﬁnd a good one (if we are defending our own theory).
Aristotle does not claim to begin his inquiries from authoritative perceptual appearances, but at the stage of testing a
theory, he assumes he has found them. Either he has no account of how we ﬁnd them, or he assumes that inquiry and
experience sort them out from the false and non-authoritative appearances.
He speaks as though a theory could safely be constructed by

CHAPTER 2 § 17

35

generalization from repeated observations, and as though the result of such generalization were a sufﬁcient basis for
evaluating theories. In giving this impression he fails to notice the importance of initial theoretical assumptions and
causal hypotheses, and their inﬂuence on our conception of the data from which we generalize. His views about the
testing of theories rely on the same assumptions that control his account of inquiry and induction.

17. Conclusions on Aristotle's Empirical Method
Aristotle claims that inquiry leads us from what is known to us to objective principles known by nature, naturally prior,
and informing us of an independent reality. His account of inquiry expresses these convictions; for he has no doubt of
the accuracy of our authoritative perceptual appearances, and if we use these to form and to test theories, we will reach
theories that correspond to the objective reality revealed by our perceptual appearances.
Aristotle does not justify his convictions. His account of inquiry and discovery leaves out those very aspects of them
that raise difﬁculties for realism. (1) He assumes that we can ﬁnd true perceptual appearances to serve as the basis for
our induction and as an independent test of the truth of a theory; but some theoretical beliefs are needed to identify
these appearances. (2) Aristotle speaks as though we could perform induction by generalization from surveys of the
particular observations; but correct generalization needs some idea of the right kinds. Aristotle does not mention the
role of theoretical conceptions in forming our beliefs about kinds. (3) To reject theories that conﬂict with appearances,
we must have found the authoritative perceptual appearances; and to ﬁnd those that explain appearances, we must be
able to ﬁnd explanations. In each case we need some theory.
Each of these unnoticed complications raises a difﬁculty for the assumption that we discover objective principles. For
if we take account of what Aristotle overlooks at each stage, we must admit that our appearances do not provide a test
that is completely independent of theory. If, as Aristotle suggests, we could identify authoritative appearances
independently of all theory, then we would have some access to an independent reality against which we could test the
theories. If, on the other hand, we recognize the role of theoretical assumptions, we challenge Aristotle's grounds for
conﬁdence in the possibility of objectivity, since we challenge the independence of authoritative appearances.32
A defence of realism through empiricism is closely connected with

36

CHAPTER 2 § 18

epistemological foundationalism.33 If Aristotle can argue that knowledge of ﬁrst principles requires grounds that do not
themselves depend on further grounds for their support, and that perceptual appearances provide these grounds, then
he can claim to have described a way to approach knowledge of genuine ﬁrst principles. But in fact his own
appearances do not seem to constitute completely independent grounds; for in accepting some appearances as
authoritative, we seem to rely on further grounds and assumptions that are not themselves simply statements about
appearances. Either we have to reject foundationalism or we must reject Aristotle's appearances as a suitable
foundation. In either case, we challenge Aristotle's particular defence of realism.
Aristotle sometimes seems somewhat inclined to accept a foundationalist assumption, in so far as he sometimes treats
appearances as though they were self-evidently true.34 But this does not seem a plausible solution. Even if he has some
reason for ascribing self-evidence to some appearances, he can hardly ascribe it to all the appearances we need to trust
if we are to reach the right conclusion of inquiry. If, then, we doubt Aristotle's naïve realism, his description of
empirical inquiry will strengthen, rather than remove, our doubts about the prospects of reaching objectively true ﬁrst
principles.
Some doubts might be removed if Aristotle could give us reasons for conﬁdence in some of the non-perceptual
appearances that guide our interpretation and evaluation of perceptual appearances. Since the discussion of these
appearances belongs to dialectic, it is reasonable to turn to his account of dialectical inquiry.

18. The Functions of Dialectic
Dialectic is ‘a method from which we will be able to syllogize from common beliefs (endoxa) about every topic
proposed to us, and will say nothing conﬂicting when we give an account ourselves’ (Top. 100a18–21). He refers to
common beliefs again, in his deﬁnition of a dialectical syllogism as the one that syllogizes from common beliefs
(100a29–30). Dialectic has different tasks.
It is useful for three purposes: for gymnastic exercise, for encounters, and for the philosophical sciences. (1) It is
evident from the facts themselves that it is useful for gymnastic exercise; for if we have a methodical procedure of
inquiry, we will more easily be able to undertake the subject proposed to us. (2) It is useful for encounters; for if we
have catalogued the beliefs of the many, we will meet them, not from other people's, but from their own views, and
redirect whatever remarks of theirs appear to us to be incorrect. (3) It is useful for the philosophical sciences,
because if we fully examine the puzzles on each side

CHAPTER 2 § 19

37

(diaporêsai), we will more easily see what is true or false. And it is also useful for 〈ﬁnding〉 the ﬁrst principles of
each science. For we cannot say anything about them from the proper ﬁrst principles of the science in question,
since the ﬁrst principles are prior to everything else. Hence it is necessary to discuss them through the common
beliefs on each subject. And this is proper to dialectic alone, or to it more than to anything else; for since it
examines, it has a road towards the ﬁrst principles of all disciplines. (Top. 101a26–b4)35
These different tasks are connected, and the third function of dialectic relies on the ﬁrst two.36
Gymnastic techniques show us how to argue for different positions, and the ways in which different arguments can be
misleading; and if we know this, we can both raise and solve puzzles.37 Further, we need to know how to conduct
‘encounters’; for we have to proceed through the common beliefs on each topic, and we must ‘examine’ (exetazein) the
prevalent views.38 And if our examination is to make progress, we must ‘redirect’ (or ‘modify’, metabibazein) beliefs in
the right direction, and so we must know both what the right direction is and how to make someone else see that it is
the right direction.39
Aristotle's statement of the third function of dialectic is quite limited. He does not say whether a dialectical discussion
of a given proposition will ever supply sufﬁcient reasons for believing that the proposition is a principle of some
science. The ﬁrst principles of a science are supposed to be ‘known by nature’, and naturally prior, describing objective
reality. Aristotle assumes that the discussion of ﬁrst principles through common beliefs is a way to approach objective
principles; and our examination of dialectic has to see how it is to perform this task.40
Moreover, in claiming that dialectic has a road towards ﬁrst principles Aristotle describes an approach that is different
from the method of empirical inquiry. For his remarks on empirical method do not accord to dialectic the prominent
role claimed for it in the Topics. Either (1) dialectic is a very subordinate part of empirical inquiry and (contrary to the
suggestion of the Topics) has no further constructive role; or (2) empirical inquiry is really dialectic; or (3) they are two
distinct methods. A fuller description of dialectic will support the third answer.41

19. The Starting-Point of Dialectic
Aristotle says dialectic is argument from common beliefs (endoxa); and these are the things prior and better known to
us from which inquiry begins.42 They are beliefs of the many or the wise or both; they are also called ‘appearances’ (EN
1123b22–4, 1145b2–3, Top. 105b1, 159b21, APr 24b11, EE 1216b26–8), since what someone believes is something

38

CHAPTER 2 § 19

that appears to him (though the converse does not follow). As usual, appearances are contrasted with arguments (EE
1216b26–8), indicating that the appearance is relatively immediate, in comparison with an explicit argument.
The relevant common beliefs, however, are only a subset of appearances. Admittedly, they should be apparent:
but apparent not to just anyone, but to people of a certain sort; for it is an indeﬁnitely long task to examine the
things that make something apparent to just anyone. (Top. 170b6–8)
Not everyone's opinions count equally:
To examine all the beliefs that some people hold about happiness is a waste of time. For many things appear to
children, or sick or deranged people, about which no one with any sense would raise puzzles. . . . Nor should we
examine the beliefs of the many, any more than of these other people, since they speak haphazardly about practically
everything, and especially about happiness. (EE 1214b28–1215a2)43
The relevant beliefs, then, are those held by fairly reﬂective people after some reﬂexion.
In rejecting plainly foolish or ‘haphazard’ and ill-considered beliefs, Aristotle shows that he does not expect the
relevant appearances to be the immediate reactions of the sort that might be reported by a survey of public opinion.
While the appearances are not the product of dialectical inquiry, and still contain puzzles and possible conﬂicts, they
should have been formed by people who are fairly careful to form beliefs that seem reasonable in the light of their
other beliefs, and whose beliefs as a whole seem initially plausible.
Though dialectic relies on common beliefs, it does not conﬁne itself to discussion of them, and does not exclude the
possibility of proving something that sharply conﬂicts with many of them. Dialecticians also consider ‘theses’, positions
maintained by a philosopher in opposition to common views (Top. 105a3, 159b30, viii 5). The falsity of a philosopher's
thesis is not assumed at the outset of the discussion, and the dialectician's task is to see how far we must go from the
common beliefs if we defend the counterintuitive view. We may ﬁnd that the counterintuitive position is more
consistent than its denial with the bulk of the common beliefs (cf. 173a25–7).
Since dialectical appearances must be common beliefs, and therefore must be commonly accepted, they differ in
principle from the appearances from which empirical inquiry proceeds. New empirical information discovered by a
single investigator acquiring experience certainly counts as a new empirical appearance, but since it need not be

CHAPTER 2 § 19

39

commonly believed, it need not be a new dialectical appearance. While Aristotle claims that empirical inquiry and
experience improve our grasp of the appearances, he does not claim, and has no reason to claim, that they improve our
grasp of the common beliefs.
Empirical inquiry discriminates in favour of perceptual appearances, and concentrates especially on these in forming
and in testing theories. Dialecticians, however, cannot isolate a core of true appearances by picking out the strictly
perceptual appearances.44 Aristotle never suggests that dialectic is especially concerned with perception. We ought to
expect, then, that a problem needs dialectical treatment if perception seems inadequate for it.
If follows that the task of surveying and setting out the appearances will be different in the two types of inquiry. A
description of the empirical appearances will not conﬁne itself to common beliefs; the inquirer will compile further
observations resting on wider experience of the relevant area. There is no parallel in dialectic. Admittedly, it must take
some care in the presentation of common beliefs; it must begin with a critical and discriminating survey, and some
Socratic examination may be needed to elicit people's real beliefs. Still, the dialectician wants to discover what people
really believe, not—at this stage—to replace their present beliefs with others. The sort of information that is collected
in the Historia Animalium is not particularly useful for dialectic, since perception and observation do not seem especially
helpful for solving the problems treated by dialectic.
The distinction between empirical and dialectical appearances is not completely sharp. An empirical inquiry may well
begin from, among other things, the very sorts of non-perceptual common beliefs that are the staple of dialectical
argument.45 Similarly, some dialectical questions may be raised by a particular range of empirical appearances.46 Still, the
dialectician does not characteristically rely on the appearances that are discovered by empirical inquiry.47 Even if they
raise some of her problems, they do not solve them for her.48 For the dialectician as well as the empirical inquirer,
experience of the empirical facts is useful; but it is useful for a different reason. The dialectician uses empirical
information as a source of dialectical problems, so that she can see what cases the common beliefs need to be applied
to; and the information is subsidiary to the examination of common beliefs. For the empirical inquirer new
information replaces the common beliefs that were his initial starting-point; he is not bound by them, as the
dialectician is bound, for a statement of the appearances.49

40

CHAPTER 2 § 20

20. Dialectical Puzzles
In dialectical argument the next step after setting out the appearances is the examination of puzzles, aporiai. Here, as
opposed to empirical inquiry, consideration of puzzles seems to be clearly distinguished from the setting out of the
appearances, and seems to follow it. This is the order Aristotle regularly observes in his dialectical inquiries (e.g. Met. i,
iii, EN vii 2). Though puzzles are important in empirical inquiry, they are not exceptionally important; the inquirer
mentions them in the course of acquiring experience and compiling a list of the appearances. In dialectic, on the other
hand, the formulation of the puzzles sets the dialectician her task, and shapes the character of her answer:
For if we want to progress freely (euporêsai), it is relevant to have surveyed the puzzles well; for (1) subsequent
progress is the resolving of the previous puzzles, and we cannot free ourselves from bonds we do not know.50 But
puzzlement of the mind reveals this about the subject-matter; in so far as we are puzzled, our condition is similar to
that of prisoners in bonds, since it is impossible to go forward in either direction 〈i.e. by choosing either one of the
apparently contradictory beliefs causing the puzzle〉. Hence we should have ﬁnished our survey of the difﬁculties
before 〈trying to resolve them〉 both for this reason and because (2) those who inquire without ﬁrst surveying
the puzzles are similar to those who do not know which direction they ought to walk in, and besides that do not
even know if they have or have not found the thing they are looking for; for the goal is not clear to these people,
but it is clear to those who have previously raised the puzzles. Further (3) we must necessarily be better placed for
reaching a verdict if we have ﬁrst heard all the arguments carrying on the dispute, as though they were opponents in
a legal case. (Met. 995a27–b4)51
Here Aristotle distinguishes three functions for the puzzles: (1) They show us that these are the difﬁculties to be
resolved, so that we have more than a vague impression of something wrong. (2) We see more clearly the necessary
conditions for an appropriate solution, so that we do not hastily accept a solution that collapses on closer study of the
difﬁculties it was supposed to solve. (3) Our solution will be better balanced if we have listened to both the arguments
leading to apparently contradictory conclusions, so that we do not dismiss or ignore a line of argument that deserves to
be wholly or partly accepted in the solution.
Since Aristotle attaches such importance to the statement of the puzzles, they are prominent in his description of
dialectic. He cites the dialectician's capacity to examine the puzzles as the primary reason for thinking she can
contribute to the discovery of ﬁrst principles (Top. 101a35). He even claims that the solution of a puzzle will be
adequate if it solves the puzzle and difﬁculties and leaves the common beliefs

CHAPTER 2 § 20

41

standing (EN 1145b6–7; cf. 1146b7–8, EE 1235b13–18; cf. Met. 995a28–9).
In dialectic we are puzzled if we are in the condition produced by arguments that seem equally cogent but reach
contradictory conclusions:
. . . the equality of contrary reasonings would seem to be productive of a puzzle. For whenever we reason on both
sides, and everything appears to follow by each of the contrary arguments, we are puzzled about which one we
should act on. (Top. 145b17–20)52
We seem to be able to reason equally plausibly from the common beliefs to contradictory conclusions; we are puzzled
and do not know which conclusion to afﬁrm, though we seem forced to afﬁrm one. We need dialectic to help us
decide whether we must give up a common belief, or reject at least one argument as invalid, or deny that the
conclusions are really contradictory.
Every dialectical inquiry should begin from a puzzle. The dialectician should not pick questions (problêmata) from
matters that are evident to everyone or most people, since these matters raise no puzzle, or from claims that no one
believes, since no one would put these forward (Top. 104a3–8; cf. 104b22–4, 105a3–9, Rhet. 1356b33–1357a1). These
remarks suggest that a dialectician is not concerned with questions that do not puzzle anyone. On the other hand,
some dialectical problems (e.g. whether the universe is eternal or not) ﬁnd the many or the wise or both with no belief
(Top. 104b1–5), and do not seem to raise puzzles (104b12–17).53
‘Raising a puzzle’, however, can be understood in different ways. Just as empirical inquiry identiﬁes genuine puzzles,
not simply questions that we initially ﬁnd puzzling, so also dialectic, by its different methods, looks for genuine or
‘objective’ puzzles. We will not actually be puzzled by a question that we have never thought of; but it might be a
puzzling question in so far as it will puzzle anyone who thinks about it carefully. If dialectic is concerned with questions
that are puzzling even if they do not actually puzzle, the dialectician looks for puzzling questions that do not yet puzzle
anyone. But if actual subjective puzzlement is required, then the dialectician is severely hampered; for our views may
be systematically mistaken in a way that prevents us from being subjectively puzzled when we ought to be. To discover
this we may need to ﬁnd the ‘objective’ puzzles that are not yet subjective puzzles for anyone.
Aristotle's own surveys of puzzles make it clear that he seeks objective puzzles. The puzzles he raises concern the
common beliefs, and their consistency with each other and with evident facts. But they are Aristotle's own puzzles, not
simply transcribed from his predecessors,

42

CHAPTER 2 § 21

or from actual questions asked by common sense. Reﬂexion on common sense may show that we are not puzzled by
all the objectively puzzling consequences of our beliefs that ought to puzzle us; and the dialectician's task is partly to
show that sometimes common sense is too easily satisﬁed.54
The nature of a dialectical puzzle suggests that it must be wrong or misleading to claim that nothing that is evident to
all could be a dialectical problem. For something might be evident to all, but turn out, on further inquiry, to raise
severe problems.55 Perhaps Aristotle will reply that when we think about the question it will turn out not to be evident
to us, and hence not to everyone, after all. But then it will not be obvious at the start what is really evident, and we will
be unwise to exempt from dialectical scrutiny the propositions that seem evident.

21. Dialectical Puzzles and the Aims of Dialectic
The nature and role of puzzles reﬂects the difference between dialectical and empirical inquiry. In dialectic we ﬁnd
ourselves accepting apparently cogent arguments for apparently contradictory conclusions, and we see that some
revision and adjustment are needed. Dialectic encourages us to reﬂect further on the beliefs we already hold; and the
puzzles show us where the revision is needed. Aristotle has no formal account of the sort of question that raises a
dialectical rather than an empirical puzzle; but he rightly picks for dialectical examination the questions that do not
seem to be settled by his methods of empirical inquiry.
Empirical puzzles are different. Most of them are simply the result of ignorance or unfamiliarity; we have no belief at
all, or we are surprised at the actual appearances. In his empirical inquiries—those in which he surveys empirical
appearances—Aristotle characteristically raises these empirical puzzles. In his dialectical inquiries—those that begin
from common beliefs—he characteristically raises the dialectical puzzles that depend on conﬂicting arguments.
Though he uses the same terms for the stages in the two methods, his selection of appearances and of puzzles shows
that he thinks they are distinct methods.56
The dialectician's response to scepticism results from the special character of dialectical appearances and puzzles. The
appearance of cogent arguments for contradictory conclusions is a serious threat to common beliefs. For if common
beliefs force us into contradictory conclusions, they conﬂict among themselves, and we must either give some of them
up, or admit that we do not know what to believe. The sceptical argument from conﬂicting appearances is intended to
force us

CHAPTER 2 § 22

43

into just this conﬂict, and to lead us to suspension of judgment, inability to choose between the conﬂicting views.57
Since Aristotle wants to show, against the sceptic, that common beliefs are reliable, he wants to show that they do not
force us into conﬂicts and suspension of judgment. He therefore has good reason to anticipate the sceptic, by
identifying the puzzles, and showing that we have the resources within common beliefs to solve them; and so he looks
for dialectical puzzles.
Certainly a philosopher might be sceptical about the veracity of sensory appearances, and Aristotle replies to such
scepticism.58 But he does not characteristically believe that the truth of the authoritative sensory appearances is open to
serious dispute; and so he takes the task of empirical inquiry to be discovery of a theory that ﬁts the appearances, not
the vindication of the appearances themselves. Scepticism about dialectical appearances is far more attractive; and
Aristotle correspondingly regards it as a more serious challenge to be answered. If the puzzles are insoluble, we may
ﬁnd we have no good reason to accept the common beliefs we began with; and so the search for a theory is not merely
a search for an explanation, but also a search for a defence. A counter-intuitive theory such as the Socratic view of
incontinence is not dismissed out of hand simply because it conﬂicts with ‘things that appear plainly’ (EN
1145b27–31). Though Aristotle thinks it is desirable to defend the common beliefs, some argument for their truth
needs to be given in each particular case to show that acceptance of the common beliefs is the right response to the
puzzles they raise.59 This demand imposed on dialectical argument distinguishes it from empirical argument.60

22. The Construction of a Theory
Once the dialectician has expounded the objective puzzles, her next task is to ﬁnd some general theory or principle
that will solve them. Empirical inquiry begins from the particulars grasped in perception, and proceeds to the universal
grasped by reason; but in dialectic the contrast between particular and universal is less prominent. Indeed Aristotle
even says that we must proceed from the universal to the particulars, since the inarticulate whole is better known to
perception (Phys. 184a16–26). We begin with what is confused (184a18–23), and look for a result that is clear.61 The
progress from the confused to the clear is far more prominent than the progress from the particular to the universal.62
This difference reﬂects the difference in the appearances. Some of our empirical data may be confused or inarticulate,
but this is not their main fault. Experience helps us to discover new perceptual appearances, and

44

CHAPTER 2 § 22

to use them to correct some of our initial beliefs; and it would be quite misleading and distorting to suggest that its
main task is the clariﬁcation and articulation of our initial beliefs. But the suggestion is not at all misleading for
dialectical appearances. The puzzles they generate are a sign of confusion; for if we have arguments for contradictory
conclusions, we are unsure about the implications of our beliefs, and therefore about their content. In deciding if they
really imply what they seem to imply, we clarify them.
The primary method of empirical discovery is induction. An inquiry begins with perception and tries to add enough
perceptions to provide the basis for inductive argument to a universal. Aristotle assumes that the perceptions inform
us of particulars, and that our main task in forming a theory is to generalize these pieces of accurate information about
particulars. For dialectic, on the other hand, induction, though relevant and useful, is not the primary method.63 The
common beliefs are often already universal in form, and the dialectician's task is not to generalize them. They are
unsuitable as ﬁrst principles because they raise puzzles that the dialectician seeks to solve; and for this purpose it will
often be unhelpful to appeal to the generalizing function of induction.
Aristotle's view of dialectical discovery ﬁts the dialectician's professional concern with the puzzles. A full preliminary
exposition of the puzzles is the right preparation for an answer, but it would be unwise to try to answer them directly.
If we simply claim that one side of a puzzle is true and one false, or if we interpret some other belief in a way that
avoids a puzzle, we simply add another conﬂicting belief to those that we have already found. We need some further
principle from which we can derive the distinctions and claims that will solve the puzzles; and if this principle is not
itself to generate puzzles and disputes, it should be agreed by the different parties to a dispute.
Aristotle, therefore, characteristically begins his constructive argument by trying to ‘make a new start’ (DA 412a3–6,
Met. 1041a6–7, EN 1174a13–14, EE 1218b31–2; cf. EN 1097a24). A suitable new start should emerge from
appearances, or modiﬁed versions of them, that have not been challenged by any of the puzzles that have been raised.64
These are the beliefs that all sides hold in common (Phys. 213a19–22) or those that after examination still seem to be
correct (210b32–4); they allow the dialectician to begin with a point that is not in dispute.65
Aristotle's advice about making a new start shows how far the character of the puzzles controls the conduct of a
dialectical argument; the dialectician's method is different from the empirical inquirer's because the solution of the
puzzles is the dialectician's main concern, and he needs to argue from premisses that are unaffected by puzzles.
Moreover, the advice assumes crucially that we have surveyed the

CHAPTER 2 § 23

45

puzzles carefully, and especially that we have raised the objective puzzles. If we make a fresh start from beliefs that are
undisputed because no one has thought of disputing them, they may turn out to be highly disputable, and puzzles may
arise as soon as we appeal to them. A starting-point that relies on our failure to raise puzzles that ought to be raised is
not a reliable basis for claims about truth. Equally, we should not be deterred from relying on a premiss, if puzzles
have been raised about it foolishly and are easily answered. In each case we should be guided more by the objective
puzzles than by what people have found puzzling. Having used the objective puzzles to ﬁnd a new start, we can
formulate our answer.
Constructive dialectic should proﬁt from the gymnastic and peirastic functions of dialectic.66 The practice of these
functions often requires a defence of false views and an attack on true ones (Top. 141a24–37, 159b25–35); but the
tactics are also relevant to constructive dialectic.67 They are legitimate ways of challenging the defender of a thesis; and
so resourceful defenders should be sure that they are not open to such challenges.68 The dialectician becomes aware of
reasonable lines of objection, and will be careful, as far as possible, to avoid them.69

23. The Evaluation of Dialectical Theories
In dialectic as in empirical inquiry, Aristotle rejects theories that conﬂict with appearances.70 He urges us not to accept a
counterintuitive thesis with absurd or repugnant consequences (Top. 160b17–22) just because we are too dense to solve
the puzzles that arise from denial of the thesis (Met. 1012a17–20, EN 1146a21–7). He is reluctant to give up widely or
universally shared beliefs:
As for those who object that what all things seek is not good, surely there is nothing in what they say. For things
that seem 〈 good 〉 to all things we say are 〈 good〉; and those who undermine this conviction are not
altogether likely to say anything more convincing 〈 in place of it〉. (EN 1172b35–1173a2)71
He claims that sometimes the critics of a common belief will undermine their own case against it, since any grounds we
might have for believing the critics are much weaker than our grounds for accepting the common belief that the critics
challenge.
Still, since the appearances are common beliefs, not initially certiﬁed as true, he must and does allow that it is
sometimes right to reject them; sometimes we have good reason to support a theory with counterintuitive
consequences. This is true about some of Aristotle's conclusions in

46

CHAPTER 2 § 23

the Physics, e.g. his rejection of a separate inﬁnite and of a real void, and about some of his ethical conclusions (e.g. Top.
173a19–30).
Aristotle rightly allows that we may be able to defend not all, but only the most and the most important or
authoritative (kuria; cf. EN 1145b5–6), of the common beliefs. This condition corresponds to the claim that in
empirical inquiry the ultimate test is the authoritative perceptual appearance. But it is still less likely than in empirical
inquiry that we can rely, in advance of any theory, on any ﬁrmly established appearances against which we can test the
theory. We do need some undisputed beliefs to serve as ‘new starts’ for our theory; but these need not be accepted as
authoritative. They are accepted provisionally, to see if they offer a reasonable basis for solving the puzzles.
Aristotle does not appeal explicitly to the alleged authoritative status of any dialectical appearances as a reason for
rejecting a theory that conﬂicts with them. He does assume readily that some things are clear or self-evident (Phys.
193a3–9), and that it is foolish to doubt them (GC 325a18–23).72 But the mere fact that an assumption seems obvious
does not assure us that it is authoritative; Aristotle entertains even a theory that conﬂicts with beliefs that seem
obviously true (EN 1145b27–9).73
Apparently, then, the test of conﬂict with appearances cannot be autonomous or decisive by itself. Perhaps only
dialectical argument itself shows us that some common beliefs are more authoritative than others, because rejection of
them would cause the collapse of too many other beliefs that we take to be more trustworthy than our grounds for
doubt. In allowing the possibility of a true theory that violates apparently obvious appearances, Aristotle recognizes a
complication in the appeal to authoritative appearances that he does not recognize in the case of empirical appearances.
In dialectic, as in empirical inquiry, the appearances should positively support a correct theory, even though they may
be consistent with several incorrect theories. Once again, the positive support depends on the theory's ability to explain
the appearances and make them seem reasonable.74 But the type of explanation required of the dialectician, in contrast
to the empirical inquirer, corresponds to the special aims of dialectic. An empirical theory should solve the puzzles by
removing our ignorance and explaining a puzzling fact; its primary aim is not to give us reasons for accepting the
beliefs that raised the puzzle. In dialectic, however, the puzzles arise from apparently conﬂicting beliefs; and so a
theory should show that both the apparently conﬂicting beliefs are reasonable:
We should ﬁnd an account that will yield, better than any other, the things that seem true on these questions, and
will resolve the puzzles and the contrarieties. It will do this if it appears reasonable that the contrary things seem
true; for this

CHAPTER 2 § 23

47

sort of account, more than any other, will agree with the appearances. And it turns out that the contrarieties are left
standing if what is said is true in one way, and not true in another. (EE 1235b13–18)75
The resolution of the initial conﬂict, and the defence or modiﬁcation of the beliefs that seemed to generate it, are
characteristic of the dialectical, rather than the empirical, attempt to yield the appearances.
In dialectic, then, our plausible and undisputed ‘new start’ should show how far the beliefs that appeared to generate
the puzzles are credible, and how far they can avoid generating puzzles. Sometimes our new start allows us to see that
at least one of the arguments for the two sides of the puzzle adds some false premisses to the appearance that seemed
to cause the trouble; sometimes it shows us that when we articulate the appearance more carefully, we should not
interpret it in the way that causes the puzzle.76 On the other hand, a theory will reject some appearances, if a puzzle
shows that doubt about them is well founded, and if their rejection allows us to solve the puzzle. Hence the success of
the theory must be considered from these two points of view at once.77
A correct theory must not only yield, explain, and support the true appearances; it must also explain why the false
appearances might have seemed true even though they are false (Phys. 211a9–11, EN 1136a23–b14, 1144b32–1145a2).
Often it will do this in the course of solving the puzzles, by showing what is wrong, though plausible, about one side of
a puzzle. An explanation of the false beliefs is part of the dialectician's task since he wants a theory that accounts for all
the appearances. It is also part of his task in relation to his audience. Dialectical argument is meant to convince us if we
begin by believing the appearances. We are more readily and more fully convinced if our false beliefs can be explained
rather than ignored; if they were not explained they might still appear to be sources of objections to dialectical
arguments (cf. EN 1154a22–6, EE 1246a13).
A degree of imprecision in Aristotle's account is really one of its virtues. To solve the puzzles and to give a reasonable
interpretation of the appearances, we must reconcile the initial beliefs and the other claims that come to seem
reasonable in the course of inquiry. The survey of puzzles shows us that something has to give way, since we cannot be
content with the suspension of belief that results from the recognition of unsolved puzzles. We must show either that
we have misunderstood our initial belief, or that we must reject part of an argument that seemed plausible. Our choice
of solution depends on the consequences for our other beliefs, both about particular cases and about general
principles. No particular subset of beliefs is in principle beyond revision; and the theorist's task is to achieve fairly
broad coherence.

48

CHAPTER 2 § 24

24. The Special Role of Dialectic
Aristotle recognizes important differences between empirical and dialectical method; and these differences all begin
from the different tasks set for the two methods. Empirical inquiry tries to remove our ignorance and lack of beliefs; it
seeks to accumulate perceptual data by experience, and to generalize from them by induction. Dialectic is not
concerned with our lack of beliefs, but with conﬂicts and difﬁculties in the beliefs we already have. For dialectic, the
study of puzzles is central, and induction and generalization are secondary, reversing the order of importance in
empirical inquiry. Similarly, the puzzles constrain the form of an acceptable dialectical solution, to a degree without
parallel in empirical inquiry.
These differences reﬂect the relatively non-empirical character of dialectic. It is non-empirical in so far as it is
concerned with questions that are relatively recalcitrant to empirical solution. This claim does not imply that empirical
discoveries are always irrelevant to dialectical puzzles. We are free to agree that a certain level of empirical information
is needed for us to discover certain puzzles, and that further information may make other puzzles seem less
compelling, or may make their solution less urgent; Aristotle's views about elemental change, for instance, might raise
dialectical puzzles about matter that will no longer bother us if we reject the empirical theory. But such cases do not
challenge the general description of dialectic.
Dialectical puzzles concern concepts and assumptions that we use to interpret and understand experience as a whole;
they will therefore not be easily modiﬁed by experience, since they will control our interpretation of any experience that
might seem likely to modify them.78 If, for instance, we believe ﬁrmly and fundamentally that our senses deceive us, we
will not be ready to change any beliefs, especially this fundamental one, through sense-experience. Disbelief in the
reality of change or in the Principle of Non-Contradiction will make us immune to the normal effects of empirical
information; and so it is not surprising that Aristotle treats these as dialectical rather than empirical puzzles.
This description extends Aristotle's claim that dialectic is about ﬁrst principles, and therefore about questions that are
not readily answered by arguments and evidence relying on the truth of those principles. He claims, for this reason,
that a science cannot defend its own principles to someone who wants an argument that does not assume their truth.
He can fairly claim, for similar reasons, that appeals to experience presuppose principles that need some defence apart
from an appeal to the experience that presupposes them.
This account of the non-empirical character of dialectic may sound

CHAPTER 2 § 25

49

too Kantian to express anything that is likely to have occurred to Aristotle. But if he had tried to face the general
question about dialectic, his views about its appropriateness for ﬁrst principles might reasonably suggest this answer
to him.

25. Questions About Dialectic
Aristotle claims that his methods lead to the discovery of objective principles that are ‘known by nature’, because they
describe an independent objective reality. How far does he make the necessary realist claims about the results of his
methods, and how far does he justify them in his account of the method? We need to ask these questions separately for
empirical and for dialectical inquiry, since the answers are different.
Aristotle's attitude to empirical inquiry is a rather naïve form of realism. He tends to assume without question that we
can isolate a reliable body of hard perceptual data informing us about an independent reality, and that these ﬁrmly
determine the shape of an acceptable theory. His assumptions rest on an account of empirical inquiry that is oversimpliﬁed at the crucial points.
His account of dialectic removes some of the over-simpliﬁcation; and if he had recognized more analogies between the
two methods his account of empirical inquiry would have been better. He recognizes that we cannot isolate a set of
ﬁrm data in advance of a theory, and that the demands of the theory may cause us to modify some appearances that at
ﬁrst seemed ﬁrm. Dialectic seeks coherence and mutual adjustment; and if Aristotle had recognized the same
requirements in empirical inquiry, his account of it would have been less naïve.
If, however, the account of dialectic seems less naïve, it also seems less realist. For though Aristotle must assume that
dialectic leads to objective ﬁrst principles, he does not assert this conviction in his description of dialectical method,
and it is hard to see how the method can support any such conviction.79 If a dialectical inquiry succeeds, we will have
achieved coherence among our beliefs, by revision of the appearances we began with. Such coherence may be worth
having; but Aristotle seems to give us no reason for believing that it has led us nearer to a description of any objective
reality. It seems quite possible to achieve coherence without moving any closer to the truth, and Aristotle does not say
why this sort of coherence is not the most that we can expect from dialectical inquiry.80
If Aristotle is less realist about dialectical than about empirical inquiry because he is less naïve, then the questions we
have raised about the

50

CHAPTER 2 § 25

results of dialectic should be raised about the results of empirical inquiry too. The difﬁculties seem less severe only
because Aristotle's description does not expose them as clearly.
Aristotle's educated person ought, therefore, to be unsatisﬁed by Aristotle's answers. These difﬁculties will matter to us
in two ways. First, we must bear in mind our doubts about dialectic as we examine some of the particular philosophical
claims that seem to be defended by dialectical argument. Second, we must see if Aristotle has any better account of
how he can achieve the objectivity he claims for the results of inquiry. We will explore the ﬁrst question by discussing
some of the dialectical doctrines of the Categories and Physics, and return to the second question in examining the theory
of science in the Posterior Analytics.
In the Metaphysics the two questions come together. Aristotle argues that a dialectical justiﬁcation of appropriate
principles can be found. In the most fundamental case, some principles are needed for us to recognize regularity and
objectivity in our experience at all; this claim is defended in Metaphysics iv. In less fundamental cases the Aristotelian
principles are needed to ﬁnd regularities and explicable tendencies in nature that would otherwise be unavailable to us.
This claim is defended in Metaphysics vii–ix. A defence of these claims shows how a selective attitude to appearances in
dialectical argument can be justiﬁed. The sorts of distinctions that Aristotle argues for in the Categories and Physics are
defensible by appeal to something more than shared beliefs.
The kind of argument Aristotle offers in the Metaphysics is dialectical in so far as it appeals to some common beliefs; but
it is not merely dialectical, since it is systematically selective in its attitude to common beliefs; it is strong dialectic, as
opposed to pure dialectic. At this stage I have not tried to say how Aristotle conceives strong dialectic, or how viable
his conception of it might be. But we have seen why he needs something like it, if he is to argue for the objective truth
of the results achieved by dialectical inquiry.

3 Constructive Dialectic
26. Positive Functions for Dialectic
We have examined some of the difﬁculties raised by Aristotle's explicit description of dialectic. But to understand the
description better, and to see how far the practice of dialectic strengthens or weakens our doubts, we should discuss
some of the central Aristotelian doctrines founded on dialectical argument. It is best to begin with the Topics and
Categories, which deal at length with some of the central problems that are classiﬁed as ‘logical’, as opposed to physical
or ethical.
Much of the Topics consists of rules for attacking or defending theses that involve reference to some central Aristotelian
concepts; Aristotle shows how to argue about the four predicables—coincident, proprium, genus, and deﬁnition. The
categories or ‘kinds of predicates’ are introduced as a tenfold division of each of the four predicables, the four possible
types of properties predicated in a dialectical proposition or discussed in a dialectical problem (103b2–19).1 The
propositions are said to signify one or other of the categories. The distinctions underlying this tenfold division are
presented at greater length in the Categories.
Aristotle claims that the basic realities are spatio-temporal particulars, e.g. individual men or trees; these are ﬁrst
substances because other realities depend on them in some way in which they do not depend on other realities. The
other realities include the natural kinds (second substances) to which the ﬁrst substances belong (e.g. man, tree), and
the items (e.g. colour, height, or shape) that belong in non-substance categories. The treatment of the predicables, the
categories, and of other dialectical concepts rests on these ontological views.
An account of these dialectical concepts is useful for gymnastic and peirastic, since it may allow us to identify errors in
the opponent's argument; it is useful to point out that he asks questions about relatives that are suitable only for
substances. But these concepts are especially important for the constructive function that makes dialectic a road
towards ﬁrst principles (Top. 101a34–b4).
Dialectic advances towards ﬁrst principles through dialectical puzzles. Once we ﬁnd the conﬂicting beliefs that cause a
puzzle, we try to resolve the puzzle by making a ‘new start’ (e.g. DA 412a3–6).2 The new start relies on undisputed and
authoritative beliefs that have not been

52

CHAPTER 3 § 27

challenged by the puzzles. Since the main dialectical concepts incorporate such beliefs, they should show what Aristotle
takes for granted in dialectical argument.
Aristotle appeals to what we say about (e.g.) the individual man, the species man, white, double, and half, to support
his claims about substances, qualities, and relatives; often he relies on grammatical and syntactical features of words
and sentences. Throughout he alludes to standard dialectical tactics, and has in mind the dialectical context, even
though he is not actually conducting a dialectical debate.3
But his appeal to common beliefs is selective; for he relies on further assumptions to justify his acceptance of some
common beliefs over others. Evidently these assumptions determining the choice among common beliefs need some
defence; if they are just common beliefs, they reintroduce the original problem, but if they have some other status, it
still needs to be explained. The four predicables, the ten categories, and homonymy, are introduced in Topics i. The
Categories discusses the categories, and especially substance, at some length; and if we follow its discussion, we also raise
the main difﬁculties about the concepts introduced in the Topics.
The character of Aristotle's defence of the dialectical concepts helps to explain his use of them in arguments about ﬁrst
principles. At the end of this chapter I turn from the Categories to Physics i, where Aristotle's exposition of the ﬁrst
principles of natural philosophy relies on the dialectical concepts examined in the Categories. Aristotle's use of these
concepts shows that he takes them to express common beliefs; and in defending his own views about ﬁrst principles,
he is content to cite the agreement of his views with common beliefs. But such a dialectical defence of ﬁrst principles
does not show that they are objective principles.

27. The Nature of the Categories
Aristotle introduces the categories:
Of the things said according to no combination each signiﬁes either substance or quantity or quality or relative or
where or when or being in a position or having or doing or being affected. (1b25–7).4
The items in the categories are beings (onta, 1a20), classiﬁed according to their relation to a non-linguistic subject
(1a20–b9).5
Aristotle draws distinctions between words, but they do not reﬂect ordinary grammatical distinctions. For
grammatically similar words

CHAPTER 3 § 27

53

may have different functions; some signify an item in just one category, but other grammatically similar words signify
items in more than one category. ‘Man’ and ‘musician’ are grammatically similar, but ‘man’ signiﬁes an item in one
category, and ‘musician’ signiﬁes items in two categories—both a substance, a human being, and one of his qualities,
musicality.6
The different categories correspond to different answers to the ‘What is it?’ question asked about different things.7
Aristotle pursues this Socratic question to a more general level than it is pursued in any Platonic dialogue (Top.
103b27–35). He suggests that the categories provide the most general informative answers to the Socratic demand for
deﬁnitions.
In pursuing the Socratic demand Aristotle also restricts it. The most general Socratic question is ‘What is a being?’, or
‘What is it to be something?’, and Aristotle refuses to give a single answer to this question, since he thinks there is no
one property to be identiﬁed. He therefore connects his doctrine of the categories with the homonymy or multivocity
(pollachôs legesthai) of being. He begins the Categories by deﬁning homonymy and synonymy, as different relations
between things with the same name. Then he at once asserts that beings are spoken of in four ways; it is reasonable to
infer (though he does not say so) that these four ways reﬂect the homonymy of beings; he has given good reason to
suppose that beings are homonymous, and he offers no counterargument or deﬁnition to show that beings are
synonymous.8
In appealing to homonymy Aristotle resorts to a characteristic form of dialectical argument. He thinks we should ask,
at the beginning of a Socratic inquiry into F, whether the name ‘F’ is homonymous, or (equivalently) whether the things
signiﬁed by ‘F’ are homonymous or spoken of in many ways (pollachôs legomena; cf. Phys. 185a21). If we show that Fs are
homonymous, we show that no single answer to ‘What is F?’ applies to all genuine Fs. Sometimes a single answer is
ruled out because ‘F’ has different senses; and some of the tests for homonymy look like reasonable tests for
distinguishing different senses of a word.9
Further tests for homonymy need not imply difference of sense, but still rule out a single deﬁnition stating the essential
features of all Fs. If Fs are found in very different subjects (106a23–35, 106b21–5), or are incomparable (107b13–18),
they are homonymous, and a different deﬁnition is needed for each kind. The different kinds of subjects provide the
reason for seeing homonymy in being, one, and good (106a1–8, 107a3–12, 169a22–5, 170b19–25). Here Aristotle
seems to be concerned with the correspondence of the names to important distinctions in reality.10 These tests for
homonymy imply that dialectic is more than a technique for the conduct of arguments; for it has to reﬂect our

54

CHAPTER 3 § 27

views about the real distinctions between kinds of things. The correct practice of dialectic requires awareness of the
real distinctions.
For these reasons, however, appeals to multivocity have a strictly limited force in settling disputes. If, for instance, the
claim that goods are multivocal rests on an account of goods that is challenged by a rival account, the appearance of
multivocity is not a ﬁrm datum that can fairly be used against the rival account; for the appearance rests on the account
that is being challenged. It follows that some of Aristotle's more philosophically interesting and useful appeals to
multivocity will require us to examine the controversial assumptions that may underlie them.11
The homonymy of being, therefore, implies not primarily a difference of sense in the verb ‘to be’, but a real distinction
among beings. Aristotle argues that predication does not always express the same relation, and that the items it
introduces are of different types. We might agree that ‘The dog is tall’ introduces two different things signiﬁed by ‘dog’
and ‘tall’, without seeing the importance of the difference; for we might think ‘dog’ is a name for a certain kind of
animal in the way ‘Rover’ is a name for this animal, and that ‘tall’ is a name for some other sort of object. But we
would be wrong; for whereas Rover has dimensions and is in a particular place, we apparently cannot say the same
about the objects named by ‘dog’ and ‘tall’.
To see the importance of these issues is to see the point of the doctrine of the categories. Aristotle agrees that ‘tall’
names an object of some sort—there is something in extra-linguistic reality corresponding to it—but he denies that it
names a further object of the same sort as Rover. In describing substances, qualities, relatives, and the items in other
categories, he tries to say more precisely what is implied in speaking of different ‘sorts’ of objects at this most
general level.12
Aristotle's method of argument for the categories is dialectical. He remarks, for example, that it seems most special to
substance that the same and numerically one thing can receive contraries (Catg. 4a10–11). He points out that we can
say of some things that they used to be pale before they became dark, but we cannot say anything similar about, e.g.,
qualities or quantities. Similarly, we can ask of a quantity what it is equal to, but cannot ask this of other things.
Aristotle relies on our intuitive views about the sorts of things we introduce in making our assertions. The Categories
provides an argument for the list of categories, and not merely a description of it, in so far as it appeals to these sorts
of common beliefs as grounds for distinguishing categories.13
The homonymy of being reveals the differences between the types of beings, and study of these differences reveals the
special status of one type of being. Here Aristotle still follows common sense. For we may agree that there is
something for ‘tall’ as well as ‘dog’ to name, but still

CHAPTER 3 § 28

55

assume that somehow tallness is dependent on things like dogs. Aristotle accepts this intuitive assumption. In calling
one of the categories ‘substance’ (ousia), he does not just distinguish some beings from the rest, but also implies that
some are primary and basic. Though he wants to defend the reality of all ten categories, he especially wants to defend
the superior status of substance.

28. Substance and the Categories
Aristotle does not introduce ‘substance’, ousia, as a technical term to be deﬁned as he pleases; his own criteria and
candidates for substance should capture some common beliefs.14 Sometimes ousiai are supposed to be basic and
ineliminable subjects.
We call substance the simple bodies, e.g. air, ﬁre, water and all of that sort, and in general bodies and the animals,
deities and parts of them constituted out of bodies. And we call all these substance because they are not said of a
subject, but the other things are said of them. (Met. 1017b10–14)15
Aristotle assumes that everything other than a substance is composed of a substance or is some property of a
substance (1001b29–32). In Plato, on the other hand, the question ‘What is it?’ is usually asked about universals, e.g.
piety, and the answer tells us the ousia of piety, what piety is (e.g. Eu. 11a6–b1, Phd. 65d12–e1). Aristotle suggests,
similarly, that we refer to the ousia of x when we say what x is and ﬁnd its essence (Met. 1017b21–2).16
Apparently, then, Aristotle recognizes two criteria for substance—basic subject and essence. In some cases the two
criteria seem to produce different results. When we know what white is, we will know its ousia (essence), and in this
sense non-substances have an ousia (cf. Top. 140a34, b5, 146b3); but we will not yet know anything about an ousia (basic
subject).
These two criteria seem to inﬂuence Aristotle's treatment of the ﬁrst category, and especially his tendency to use two
different names for it. In the Categories it is called substance. In the Topics the list of categories is introduced twice with
‘what it is’ as the ﬁrst item, followed by the other items on the list in the Categories (103b21–7). Aristotle adds:
It is clear from them 〈 sc. the ten categories〉 that one who signiﬁes the what-it-is sometimes signiﬁes substance,
sometimes quantity, sometimes quality, sometimes one of the other categories. (103b27–9)
Then he explains how each of the categories provides an answer to the ‘What is it?’ question asked about each
different type of item; substance

56

CHAPTER 3 § 28

is the ﬁrst category, and what-it-is seems to range over all the categories. The ‘essence-criterion’ for substance seems to
underlie the ﬁrst list, and the ‘subject-criterion’ the second.17
In the Categories, however, Aristotle diverges from common beliefs, since he appeals exclusively to the subject-criterion.
He presents a fourfold division of beings—those said of a subject and not in a subject, those said of and in, those in
but not said of, and those neither said of nor in. He identiﬁes the things neither said of nor in with ﬁrst substances, and
identiﬁes the species and genera said of ﬁrst substances with second substances (2a11–19). A substance is not in any
subject, and a second substance is said of ﬁrst substances but not in any subject.18
These comments about strong predication (‘said of a subject’) and inherence (‘in a subject’) introduce us to the
distinction between particulars and universals.19 Particulars are not said of anything else; and Aristotle takes it to be
obvious that his candidates meet this condition. Whatever is numerically one is spatio-temporally uniﬁed, not existing
in many discontinuous places at the same time (Top. 103a14–23).20 Aristotle claims that this condition is satisﬁed by
particular non-substances (e.g. the particular white that belongs only to Socrates) as well as particular ﬁrst substances
(Catg. 1b6–9).21 Universals are the species and genera of the items they are strongly predicated of.22
Among universals those strongly predicated of particular substances are ‘second’ substances, which are substances to a
secondary and lesser degree than ﬁrst substances.
Among second substances, the species is more a substance than the genus; for it is nearer to the ﬁrst substance . . .
Further, the ﬁrst substances are subjects for all the other things, and all the other things are predicated of them or
are in them; and this is why they are called substances most of all. (2b7–8, 15–17)
First substances are the best substances because they are the basic subjects, and second substances are substances in so
far as they are the next-best subjects. Species are subjects for genera, and substantial species and genera are subjects for
non-substances; hence substantial species are substances more than substantial genera are, and both are substances
more than non-substantial species and genera are (2b15–22, 2b37–3a6).
These divisions diverge from common beliefs, in so far as they assume that the primary criterion for being a substance
is the subject-criterion. Aristotle assesses candidates for substance by the degree to which they are subjects. We might
suppose that he also recognizes the essence-criterion, since he remarks that second substances count as substances
partly because they reveal what ﬁrst substances are (2b7–14, 30–7). But he does not mean that the essence-criterion is
a distinct

CHAPTER 3 § 29

57

criterion. It shows that second substances are substances only because it shows how closely related they are to the ﬁrst
substances; hence the subject-criterion is still primary.
In claiming that some substances must be subjects Aristotle can appeal to common sense; but in assuming that all
substances must be subjects he seems to overlook the essence-criterion. He relies selectively on common beliefs,
apparently ignoring those that would make the essence-criterion a distinct criterion for substance; he has not justiﬁed
his selective attitude.

29. Inherence and Strong Predication
Strong predication distinguishes universals from particulars, and therefore distinguishes second from ﬁrst substances.
Inherence distinguishes non-substances from substances, both universals and particulars. It is deﬁned as follows: ‘By in
a subject I mean what belongs in something, not as a part, and is incapable of being separately from what it is in
(1a24–5).’23 The last clause of the deﬁnition simply asserts existential dependence, but the rest needs to be explained.
Aristotle offers some examples to illustrate the distinction between strong predication and inherence. Man is said of
the individual man if and only if the individual man is a man, and the individual white is in the individual man if and
only if the individual man is white. When adjectives such as ‘white’ are predicated of a subject-term, they are cognate
with abstract nouns (‘white’ with ‘whiteness’, ‘skilful’ with ‘skill’, etc.) that cannot be predicated of the subject-term (we
cannot say ‘The individual man is a skill’). The abstract noun signiﬁes an inherent item, and predicating the adjective of
the subject-term introduces the inherent item.
In these cases Aristotle says the man is a paronym of whiteness, in so far as he is called white paronymously from the
whiteness inherent in him (1a12–15). It follows that F is inherent in x if and only if the adjective ‘F-ish’ is applied
paronymously to x from F.24 Paronymy indicates the fact that x cannot be called an F.25 Correspondingly, the individual
F will be a ﬁrst substance if and only if we cannot say ‘x is a the individual F’ (it is not said of anything), and there is no
further subject that we can call F-ish paronymously from F (it is not inherent in anything).26 Aristotle's examples of ﬁrst
substances—the individual man, horse, etc.—all satisfy these conditions.27
The distinction between strong predication and inherence indicates one reason for recognizing ﬁrst substances. To say
that x is white or that whiteness inheres in x is not yet to say what it is that is white. We can

58

CHAPTER 3 § 30

answer trivially, ‘a white thing’, but white things are not just white. We still want to ask ‘x is a white what?’ and we will
answer the question by providing a noun ‘F’ that allows us to say ‘x is an F’. The answer ﬁnds the ﬁrst and the second
substance. Second substances are the species and genera of ﬁrst substances, because strong predication places the ﬁrst
substance in its kind and makes it ﬁt for further characterization by its inherent properties.
If we attach an indeﬁnite article to an adjective we still leave a gap: ‘a white . . . ’ still needs to be completed. In using the
indeﬁnite article we try to pick out one subject, but ‘white’ fails to do that, since it imposes no conditions for counting
its instances. Applied to a book with a white cover and white pages, ‘one white . . . ’ may refer to the book or to the
cover or to one of the pages. The concepts ‘book’, ‘cover’, ‘page’, however, ﬁx conditions for something's being one
book etc.; these concepts include their own arithmetic, and ‘white’ does not.28 Though Aristotle does not mention this
difference between strong predication and inherence, it helps to explain how non-substantial predications depend on
some initial substantial predication.29
The grammatical tests that distinguish strong predication from inherence rely mainly on the suitability or unsuitability
of the indeﬁnite article (more exactly, of the equivalent Aristotelian devices). Aristotle supposes that these tests sort
things into the appropriate classes that make them countable subjects. To this extent he seems to pick out a signiﬁcant
class of basic subjects, and we can see some point in the claim that these subjects belong to the category of substance.

30. Substance and Quality
So far we have tried to distinguish substantial from non-substantial properties by appeal to the difference between
count-nouns that classify subjects and adjectives that merely characterize them. But Aristotle cannot rely on this
distinction alone. For if every count-noun applicable to a ﬁrst substance implies a strong predication of it, there will be
more second substances than Aristotle wants. ‘White’ and ‘intelligent’ introduce items inherent in a man, and no countnoun corresponds to either of them; but ‘musician’ and ‘painter’ are count-nouns, and so (if count-nouns correspond
to second substances) musician and painter should be second substances attributable to a man. But Aristotle cannot
accept this result.
He may reply that a substantial predication is supposed to say what the subject is, and that mere characterizing
adjectives fail to do this. But it is difﬁcult to explain the sense of ‘What is it?’ in which ‘It's a musician’

CHAPTER 3 § 31

59

does not answer the question. In exploring Aristotle's efforts to explain this, we must follow some of his views on
qualities, change, propria, coincidents, and essence. These will not yield a clear explanation; indeed, they will show how
heavily he relies on a rather complex and incompletely explained interpretation of the ‘What is it?’ question.
Some of the difﬁculties appear in Aristotle's treatment of the category of quality. Quality is connected with the question
‘What sort?’ (poios, qualis); but Aristotle wants the category to collect only a subset of the answers to the question. For
he remarks that the question may reﬂect either the contrast between essential and coincidental properties or the
contrast between particulars and universals. All second substances are poia, but they all answer the ‘What is it?’
question about ﬁrst substances, and hence are not in the category of quality.30
In the discussion of the category Aristotle simply enumerates the different types of qualities, with no account of a
common feature that would distinguish them from substantial poia.31 Among qualities he mentions shape (schêma),
ﬁgure (morphê), condition, state, and capacity as different types of qualities. But it seems easy to think of second
substances or differentiae that can be understood this way; being a rational animal is having a capacity, even a tendency,
to reason, and naturally having two feet seems to be a state.
The category of quality, then, seems too broad for Aristotle's purposes. The category gets its name because it seems
initially plausible to group together all the items mentioned in answering the question ‘poion estin x?’, ‘what is x like?’,
but this question reﬂects a homonymy in ‘poion’.32 The basic difference between second substances and qualities
prevents Aristotle from grouping all poia together; but the intuitions that underlie the initial account do not mark or
explain the distinctions that he needs.33
This conclusion is relevant to our questions about strong predication and inherence; for it shows that we cannot hope
to explain that distinction by appeal to any antecedent grasp of the category of quality. We collect the right poia in the
category of quality only if we already know how to exclude substantial properties; and to do this we have to appeal
over again to the distinction between strong predication and inherence. No simple answer to the question ‘What is x?’
or ‘What is x like?’ provides the necessary distinctions.

31. Substance and Change
The connexion between substance and change allows some further distinction between different properties of a ﬁrst
substance. For

60

CHAPTER 3 § 31

Aristotle takes it to be a special property (proprium) of substance that a particular can remain in existence while
receiving contraries.
What seems especially special to substance is that what is numerically one and the same is able to receive contraries;
in no other case would one be able to bring forward anything which is numerically one and able to receive
contraries. The colour, e.g., which is numerically one and the same, will not be pale and dark; nor will the action
which is numerically one and the same be bad and good; and similarly with everything else that is not substance. But
a substance which is numerically one and the same is able to receive contraries. The individual man, e.g., being one
and the same, becomes at one time pale, at another time dark, and hot and cold, and bad and good; this sort of
thing does not appear in any other case . . . (4a10–22; cf. b17–18)34
First substances are, therefore, subjects of change; and Aristotle claims that this feature distinguishes substances from
inherent items. The inherent items are not subjects of change in their own category; this yellow is what it is by being the
quality it is, and if it loses its quality it ceases to exist, and hence is not a persisting subject of change at all.
If we still suggest that a quality, for instance, can become more or less interesting or dangerous. Aristotle will argue that
in these cases the genuine subject of the change is the substance in which the allegedly changing non-substance inheres.
His claim that receiving contraries is peculiar to substance is a corollary of his claim that substance is the basic subject.
If non-substances could also receive contraries, then they would also be the basic subjects of these properties. In fact,
however, the basic subjects are those in which the properties are inherent.
Questions about change show why there is some reason to recognize substances. Change, as opposed to mere
replacement, requires something to persist through it, to be the subject that changes; and if a subject cannot exist
without having the property (e.g. whiteness) that it loses in the change, then it is not the subject of the change. There
must be some further subject and it must have some further property making it one and the same subject before and
after the change.
If a proposed subject of change were inherent in a further subject, then, Aristotle assumes, the further subject would
be the real subject of change; hence nothing inherent can be the subject of change. We might appeal to the nonarithmetic character of concepts indicating inherence. If we want to say ‘The white became tall from being short’, we
need to answer ‘The white what?’ and the answer will identify the relevant subject. We might say ‘This individual
whiteness became less interesting’; but this is the same individual whiteness at two different times only because it
inheres in the same individual man or horse, which must therefore be the real subject of the change.35

CHAPTER 3 § 32

61

These facts about persistence and change show why some count-nouns do not refer to second substances. If they
correspond to properties that the subject can lose without ceasing to exist, then they cannot indicate what the subject
is, and so they cannot indicate substantial predication. If we follow this clue, we will identify the strong predications
with those that signify the necessary properties of the subject—those properties that the subject must retain if it is to
remain in existence.

32. Substance and Essential Properties
We come still closer to ﬁnding substantial properties, however, and we see why they are not simply those that persist
through change, if we examine Aristotle's use of the ‘What is it?’ question. He claims that the genus and the species
. . . alone among the things predicated reveal the ﬁrst substance. For if you supply what the individual man is, you
will supply it appropriately by supplying the species or the genus. (2b30–3)
If, however, you mention some inherent item, you will give an inappropriate answer to the question (2b34–7). The
connexion between substance and ‘What is it?’ is so close that in the Topics Aristotle actually uses this name for the
category of substance; he implies that a predication in the category of substance answers only this question, and never
states any property that fails to answer the question.36 The Topics connects ‘What is it?’ with the essence; and if we
examine Aristotle's treatment of this and related concepts, we will see what is presupposed in a claim that a property is
strongly predicated.
The Topics discusses essential, special (idia), intrinsic (kath'hauto), and coincidental (sumbebêkota) properties; and the
relations between these properties show us some of the difﬁculties about strong predication. Though Aristotle
sometimes seems to promise some understanding of these other properties that is independent of understanding
essence, in the end he is committed to explaining them by reference to essence.
The treatment of the proprium, or special property, is rather instructively confused; but it is clear enough to show why
not all necessary properties can be strongly predicated.37 The proprium excludes the essence (102a18); but a subject's
own proprium must be intrinsic to the subject (128b34–6).38 The deﬁnition states the essence of the subject, and the
statement of the proprium informs us of an intrinsic property derived from the essence.39 Since the proprium is
necessary

62

CHAPTER 3 § 32

and non-essential, not all necessary properties are essential, and therefore not all can be said of their substance.
Moreover, since the proprium must be intrinsic to the subject, it cannot be simply a necessary property. The difference
between the intrinsic and the necessary emerges from Aristotle's discussion of the category of quantity. Members of
this category (quanta) are subjects of quantitative properties; and to this extent ﬁrst substances might seem to be
quanta, since Socrates is six feet tall, and surely must have some height or other. However, Aristotle restricts quanta to
subjects that intrinsically have quantitative properties (e.g., lengths, bodies, times, distances), and excludes anything that
coincidentally has a quantitative property (Catg. 5a38–b10). In his example, an action is long not in its own right but
because of the length of time it takes, and it is the length of time that intrinsically has the property of being a year long
(5b4–6).40
Aristotle does not deny that quantitative properties are necessary to Socrates, but only that they are intrinsic to him.
But the rules are not clear. If intrinsic properties are transitive, and if Socrates intrinsically has a body, then he
intrinsically has some quantity, since bodies intrinsically have it. Aristotle does not accept this consequent of this
conditional, and so he must reject one part of the antecedent. Probably he denies that Socrates intrinsically has the
relevant sort of body; the body that is an intrinsic quantum is a geometrical solid, and perhaps Socrates' body simply
coincides, though necessarily, with the geometrical solid.41
If some necessary properties are coincidental, we cannot identify the distinction between coincidental and intrinsic
(non-coincidental) properties with the distinction between necessary and contingent (non-necessary) properties; and
Aristotle therefore needs some further account of a coincident. He deﬁnes a coincident both (1) by exclusion, as
neither genus nor deﬁnition nor proprium; and (2) positively, as what admits both of belonging and not belonging (Top.
102b4–14). The two deﬁnitions do not seem equivalent; for a necessary, non-essential, non-convertible property will
be coincidental according to the ﬁrst deﬁnition, non-coincidental according to the second.
This non-equivalence counts against the second deﬁnition rather than the ﬁrst, since the ﬁrst corresponds with
Aristotle's more usual view that intrinsic coincidents are distinct from essence and proprium (e.g. Met. 1025a30–4).
These are the properties to be demonstrated in demonstrative science and the ones we should be able to infer from a
good deﬁnition (DA 402b16–403a2). In the Analytics Aristotle assumes that these coincidents are necessary, and
therefore assumes that some coincidents are necessary.
Even some non-intrinsic coincidents seem to be necessary; while a

CHAPTER 3 § 32

63

triangle intrinsically has angles equal to 180 degrees, an equilateral triangle has this property only coincidentally, because
it is coincidentally a triangle (Top. 110b21–5). He surely thinks it is necessary for an equilateral triangle to have angles
equal to 180 degrees; he must mean simply that this is true of it qua triangle and not qua equilateral triangle. Though
the property is coincidental it is necessary. This assumption conﬂicts with the second deﬁnition, which implies that no
coincident is necessary. Aristotle is therefore wrong to offer the simpliﬁed second deﬁnition, since it suggests, contrary
to his usual view, that being necessary is sufﬁcient for being non-coincidental.42
Since the second deﬁnition conﬂicts severely with Aristotle's claims about coincidents even within the Topics, it would
be better if he gave it up. The relation between essential, intrinsic, necessary, and coincidental properties is complex,
because it reﬂects some points on which Aristotle has not clearly made up his mind. But the second deﬁnition of
coincident blurs some of the important points, and does not deserve Aristotle's support.43
Once we see the difﬁculties in Aristotle's remarks about coincidents, we cannot appeal directly to any antecedently
understood conception of the non-coincidental to explain strong predication; for coincidental and intrinsic properties
are explained by reference to essence and deﬁnition, and these still need to be clariﬁed.
A deﬁnition should refer to what is prior and better known (Top. 141a26–31). It is also intended to inform
interlocutors (139b13–15); and if they are ignorant, a deﬁnition through what is prior will not be informative to them
(141b15–21). But we must recognize that the substitute we offer as a concession to their ignorance will not be a
genuine deﬁnition. The genuine deﬁnition must state the real essence.44 It must not misrepresent the real structure and
relation of genus, differentia, and species (142b22–9, 143a29–b10, 144a5–22); nor should it pick out inappropriate
spatio-temporal properties that are inessential to the subject (144b31–145a2). The deﬁnition of a whole should not
treat it as the sum of a number of parts (150a15–21, b22–6, 151a1–13, 20–31); for the essence must include the proper
arrangement of the parts.45
All these requirements imply that a formula with the same meaning as the name still may not capture the essence.
Though the Topics does not give a complete account of the essence, it shows that if we are to ﬁnd it we need to rely on
more than common beliefs; for the constraints on a proper deﬁnition cannot normally be satisﬁed from the inspection
of common beliefs. The sort of deﬁnition that concerns Aristotle is not an intuitively familiar sort. The strict
conditions he imposes are reasonable only if he is testing claims to say how things are, and trying to ﬁnd out

64

CHAPTER 3 § 33

how things are. And if this conclusion is true about essence, it is true about coincidents, propria, and intrinsic
properties as well, since our understanding of them depends on our understanding of essence.

33. The Anomaly of Differentiae
We have now found reasons to believe that the distinction between strong predication and inherence is the distinction
between essential and non-essential properties. But this solution does not identify second substances.
〈 Not being inherent〉 is not special to substance; the differentia is not in a subject either. For footed and biped
are said of a subject—man—but are not in a subject, since neither footed nor biped is in man. Again, the account of
the differentia is predicated of whatever subject the differentia is said of; if footed is said of man, e.g., the account of
footed will also be predicated of man, since man is footed. (Catg. 3a21–8)
Though the differentia of a substance is strongly predicated of the substance, Aristotle denies that it is a second
substance. Is he right?
We initially distinguished strong predication from inherence by distinguishing predication of count-nouns from
predication of characterizing adjectives. At ﬁrst sight ‘the individual man is biped’ seems to be an alleged case of strong
predication that violates this rule. The violation, however, is only apparent. For though the differentia-term is an
adjective, its gender agrees with the gender of the understood genus-term, not with that of the subject-term. Thus in
‘man is biped’ (3a28) ‘man’ is masculine, but ‘biped’ is neuter because ‘animal’ is neuter. In ‘prudence is practical
science’, ‘practical’ is feminine, agreeing with ‘science’ (Top. 145a13–18).46 ‘Man is biped’ is analysed as ‘Man is a
biped . . . ’, where the blank is to be ﬁlled by the appropriate genus-term.
The preferred analysis shows why Aristotle can still maintain that strong predication is nominal and inherence is
adjectival. Though ‘the man is biped’ looks like adjectival predication, it is really nominal, because it should be analysed
as ‘the man is a biped animal’. This analysis allows Aristotle to maintain that differentiae are said of their subjects. But
then the differentia-term must be ‘biped . . . ’, not just ‘biped’; and a biped . . . , e.g. a biped animal, is a second
substance. Hence the differentia is a second substance, and so is no exception to the rule that only second substances
are said of ﬁrst substances.
Aristotle, then, has no good reason for claiming that differentiae are strongly-predicated non-substances. Perhaps he is
misled into his claim

CHAPTER 3 § 33

65

by attending to some features of differentia-terms, and then drawing false conclusions about differentiae themselves.
Admittedly, differentia-terms are not predicated in the same way as terms indicating paronymy and inherence; the
gender of the adjective marks the distinction. Moreover, they are not second-substance terms; for in predicating the
differentia-term (‘biped. . . ’) we do not mention any second substance.
These facts might suggest the conclusion that differentiae are said of ﬁrst substances, but are not second substances.
But the conclusion is not justiﬁed. For the differentia-term refers to (without mentioning) the combination of the
genus and the differentiating property; this combination is the species; and the species is a second substance. To
predicate the differentia is just to predicate the species, by mentioning something else about it.
If differentiae are not second substances, they must fail to answer the ‘What is it?’ question. And indeed Aristotle
argues that while genera say what the subject is, differentiae say only what it is like, or what sort it is (poion, Top.
122b12–17, 128a20–9, 139a28–31, 142b25–9). This might lead us to think that differentiae are qualities, since poion
picks out that category; but Aristotle cannot agree, since qualities are inherent and differentiae are not.
And yet, once we see why differentiae are not qualities, we cannot easily deny that they answer the ‘What is it?’
question. If we just say ‘Man is a biped’, it is natural to ask ‘Biped what?’; indeed the neuter gender of the differentiaterm invites this further question. But though the genus-term is not used in the predication, the genus is referred to,
and hence the differentia is said of the species. If we keep this in mind, the differentia, since it includes the genus, will
answer the ‘What is it?’ question, even though we will not be able to say what the answer is if we simply mention the
differentia-term.47
The treatment of differentiae in the Categories makes them thoroughly anomalous. Since they are not said of substance,
they cannot be in the category of substance. But they cannot be in any non-substance category either; for members of
these categories are inherent in substances, and differentiae are not. But if differentiae are not in any category, they
falsify Aristotle's initial claim that things said without combination always signify items in categories.
These anomalies are unnecessary, since Aristotle could give good reasons for taking differentiae to be second
substances. The fact that he rejects this view of them is signiﬁcant because it exposes the limitations of his method in
the Categories. In distinguishing differentiae from inherent properties he follows a useful grammatical clue, the gender of
the differentia-term. But he does not attend to the ontological fact explaining this grammatical point. If he had
attended to this fact, he

66

CHAPTER 3 § 35

could not reasonably have refused to count differentiae as second substances. The grounds for refusal are fairly
superﬁcial, reﬂecting grammatical distinctions that turn out not to justify any distinction between substantial species
and non-substantial differentiae.
We should conclude, then, that Aristotle's conditions for ﬁnding second substances are quite complicated. He must
rely on the rather stringent, non-linguistic, non-intuitive conditions for identifying essential properties; these conditions
identify cases of strong predication. But he must also rely on the intuitive, indeed rather superﬁcial, linguistic tests that
distinguish nominal from adjectival predication, count-nouns from characterizing adjectives, and the question ‘What
sort is x?’ from the question ‘What is x?’. For he needs these tests to distinguish second substances from differentiae.
The resulting conception of second substance is an unsatisfactory blend of considerations of quite different types.
Though we must go far beyond the initial intuitive tests that Aristotle supplies, he cannot completely do without them.

34. The Dialectical Search for First Principles
Discussion of the Categories has shown how far Aristotle's doctrine of substance and non-substance appeals simply to
common beliefs. He begins from intuitive distinctions, and speaks as though he articulates them, even when (as in the
account of essence and strong predication) they turn out not to explain his assumptions adequately. I turn now to his
use of that doctrine in the ‘road to the ﬁrst principles’ that is said to be characteristic of dialectic. In Physics i the appeal
to common beliefs pervades and limits his attempt to ﬁnd ﬁrst principles.
Aristotle begins the Physics by describing the aims and methods of dialectical inquiry. It will proceed from things known
to us to things known by nature, and from things clear to us to things clear by nature; and it should lead to the origins
or ﬁrst principles (archai) and causes (aitia).48 Aristotle looks for two sorts of origins and causes. (1) He seeks the
‘endoxic’ principles underlying common beliefs (endoxa). (2) He also seeks ‘objective’ principles that are aspects of
reality, beings that are origins and causes of other beings. The items that are prior, clearer, and better known by nature
are external realities.
It is not surprising that Aristotle wants to ﬁnd objective origins and causes, since scientiﬁc knowledge includes grasp of
the causes. It is more surprising that this is his aim for dialectical inquiry. Dialectic seems suitable for clarifying and
explaining common beliefs, and for ﬁnding the endoxic principles that they support and presuppose; but it seems less
suitable for ﬁnding objective principles. Clariﬁcation of our beliefs

CHAPTER 3 § 35

67

will not lead to objective ﬁrst principles unless our starting-points are fairly near the truth. To be convinced by
Aristotle's conclusions, we apparently should be convinced about his starting-points.
The ﬁrst chapter of the Physics forces on us very sharply the questions that arise when we compare Aristotle's view of
science with his view of dialectic. Science is knowledge of how things are; but it rests on principles that are reached by
dialectic. Aristotle claims that dialectic has a way towards the objective ﬁrst principles of all the sciences (Top. 101b3–4);
but he also admits that it argues according to belief (100a25–30), with apparently no further reason for accepting the
truth of its starting-points.49
But if dialectic is actually to argue for objective ﬁrst principles, the initial ontological assumptions should apparently not
just be taken for granted; for unless the starting-points of the dialectical argument are defensible, it is not clear how the
argument can actually support the principles that it reaches, or how they are shown to be objective, not merely endoxic,
principles. The Categories and Topics do not explain why we should pick one set of initial assumptions rather than
another.50 But the question becomes quite pressing once we take seriously the claim of dialectic to ﬁnd objective ﬁrst
principles.

35. The Role of Dialectic
Aristotle begins with the Eleatics, who claim that what is is one and unchanging. They challenge the ﬁrst principles of
natural science, and no science answers challenges to its own principles.
To examine whether everything is one and unchanging is not to examine about nature. For a geometer has no
further account (logos) to give to those who have done away with his ﬁrst principles; giving such an account is a task
either for another science or for one common to all the sciences. The same is true in the discussion of ﬁrst
principles. (Phys. 184b25–185a3)51
In this case Aristotle does not appeal to ‘another science’, a specialized science superordinate to the one whose
principles are challenged. Instead he turns to logical dialectic, a discipline ‘common to all the sciences’, to examine the
Eleatic thesis.52
He approaches the Eleatic thesis as a paradox to be dissolved, without setting out to prove its negation.
Examining whether things are one in this way is similar to arguing dialectically against any other thesis that is stated
for the sake of argument (e.g. Heracleitus' thesis, or if someone were to say that being is one man), or dissolving an
eristic

68

CHAPTER 3 § 35

argument—which is the sort that both Parmenides and Melissus offer. (185a5–9)
A philosopher's paradoxical thesis and an eristic puzzle may be presented simply for the sake of argument or to cause
confusion, but they are worth studying for gymnastic purposes.53
Aristotle allows dialectic only a gymnastic approach to the Eleatic paradoxes, because his claims about ﬁrst principles
seem to him to exclude any other function. He assumes that the ﬁrst principles are evident and that it would be
madness to doubt them, and he infers that dialectic neither can nor should supply a further proof of the principles.54
Dialectic is useful, not for unsuccessful and unnecessary efforts to ﬁnd evident ﬁrst principles, but for arguments
against those who argue against these principles. Aristotle does not want to prove to the Eleatics themselves that they
are wrong; he wants to prove to believers in common sense that they need not be taken in by the Eleatics.
The functions allowed to dialectic here are rather restricted. Aristotle looks for objective principles; his aim is not just
to explain our beliefs, but to describe the external reality that they correspond to when they are true. The only form of
argument that he offers for this purpose is dialectical argument, since he claims that dialectic has a way towards
principles, and makes no such claim for anything else. But dialectic can claim this role only in so far as it helps us to
spot the ﬂaws, as they appear to common sense, in an argument against our ﬁrst principles. Such a role for dialectic
does not show how it can justify the principles themselves.55
Perhaps Aristotle thinks this does not matter, because the principles challenged by Eleatics are certain and evident
without proof, so that we need no proof of them. This defence will make proofs unnecessary only for the principles
that we can convince ourselves are certain and evident. But even for these principles, Aristotle's claim is doubtful. If
the only point of a proof were to make something certain and evident for us, Aristotle would be right, since there
would be nothing to prove about a claim that is already certain and evident. But this is not the only possible function of
a proof. We might want to know what other principles are related to belief in change; how they are related to it; what
we would have to give up if we ceased to believe in change. If we ﬁnd that there is something seriously wrong with our
belief in change, measured against our other beliefs, we may decide that though this belief seems evident and certain, it
cannot be true, but must be a convenient ﬁction. This is the conclusion Eleatics might reach, and Aristotle's appeal to
self-evidence is no answer to them.
If this is a reason for believing that we might need a proof of ﬁrst principles, we should also reconsider Aristotle's
claim that we cannot

CHAPTER 3 § 36

69

have a proof of them. If a proof has to prove a conclusion that is initially uncertain, from premisses that are more
certain, then we could not expect to prove ﬁrst principles. But this may be the wrong conception of proof. We may
also defend a principle by seeing how it ﬁts our other beliefs, and it is not clear why such an appeal to coherence could
not count as a proof.
Aristotle's attitude to these questions will be clearer from a discussion of the Analytics and Metaphysics.56 His
assumptions in Physics i indicate some of the difﬁculties that he raises for his views on dialectic and ﬁrst principles.

36. The Defence of First Principles
Aristotle's argument against the Eleatics follows the rules for dialectic, in so far as it relies on the Aristotelian views that
provide the ‘common places’ (topoi) for the dialectician. If the arguments are valid, their force against the Eleatics
depends on the reasonableness of these Aristotelian views. He appeals to his own doctrine of the multivocity of unity
and being. The Eleatics speak of one being, but do not explain how ‘being’ and ‘one’ are to be understood. Aristotle
shows that if we accept the doctrine of the categories, and we agree that there can be neither substances lacking nonsubstantial properties nor non-substances without substances, then the Eleatic conception of one being will seem
incoherent.
He does not show, however, why Eleatics must accept the Aristotelian doctrines that convict them of incoherence.57
Eleatics might agree with Aristotle that their conclusions conﬂict with common beliefs, and may even seem incoherent
to common sense. They argue, however, that their premisses are rationally inescapable, and that the arguments from
them are valid. Aristotle rejects these Eleatic claims (185a9–12). But to show that the Eleatic premisses are false, he
simply appeals to common beliefs, and does not face the arguments that an Eleatic might offer for departing from
common beliefs. Some of Aristotle's arguments could perhaps be used to dislodge the Eleatic, apart from a mere
appeal to common beliefs; but Aristotle does not use them for this purpose.58
The discussion of the Eleatics reﬂects the self-denying attitude of the dialectician who sticks to gymnastic practice and
the removal of puzzlement. Aristotle simply argues against those who deny it. He simply argues that if we accept some
Aristotelian assumptions about the multivocity of being and unity and about the nature of signiﬁcation, we will not be
tempted to be Eleatics. He offers no further argument that

70

CHAPTER 3 § 37

might show the Eleatics, from premisses they have to accept, that they are wrong.
It is not at all surprising that Aristotle offers no such argument; his views on dialectic and proof give him no reason to
offer it. Since the ﬁrst principles are evident in themselves, and the only function of a proof is to make something
evident that was not previously evident, dialectic should not try to prove the ﬁrst principles it examines. It does not
matter that dialectic seems incapable of arguing reliably for objective principles, since Aristotle does not think they
admit argument.
The attitude to ﬁrst principles that is expressed in this passage of the Physics requires an account of their evident and
certain character; and the Analytics offers an account.59 Still, the rest of the Physics offers dialectical arguments for ﬁrst
principles; and these will seem all the more important the more we doubt Aristotle's doctrine of ﬁrst principles. For if
we do not ﬁnd the principles self-evident, we will have to turn to the dialectical arguments that Aristotle offers to
remove objections to them.
Though Aristotle himself does not intend these arguments to show that his principles are objectively correct, it is still
worth seeing how close they come to showing this; for then we will see how they would have to be different if they
were to constitute arguments for objective principles. The difference between purely dialectical arguments and the
sorts of arguments that might support ﬁrst principles will be important if we ﬁnd that Aristotle offers apparently
dialectical arguments that seem none the less to be intended to support objective principles. For if he offers such
arguments, as he does in Metaphysics iv, we will have reason to believe his views on dialectic and proof have changed.60

37. General Features of Change
Aristotle now looks for some general account of change (kinêsis) and becoming (genesis), and notices ﬁrst the consensus
that the origins are contraries (Phys. 188a19–30). Since his predecessors have reached the true conclusion without any
argument to give them a good reason for it (188b26–30; cf. PA 642a18–19, Met. 986b31), Aristotle offers an argument
(logos, 188a31) for it.61 He appeals to the general principle that random things do not act on (poiein), and are not acted on
by, random things (188a31–4). His appeal is justiﬁed only if every becoming is also an action of one thing on another.
If it is, and if random action is impossible, random becoming is impossible. Aristotle assumes that every becoming is
the causal inﬂuence of one thing on another, and that every case of causation involves something non-random; if x
causes y, there is some general law relating types of which x and y are tokens.62

CHAPTER 3 § 37

71

To avoid random transitions Aristotle wants the termini of becoming to be contraries or intermediates (e.g. black or
grey things changing to white) rather than mere contradictories (188a36–b8). To say that all change is a transition from
not-F to F or from F to not-F is not to imply a signiﬁcant regularity; if eggs changed randomly into hens, rocks, and
computers, these are changes from eggs to non-eggs, but they imply no signiﬁcant regularity. Aristotle intends his
restriction to contraries to rule out such cases. He argues that apparent exceptions to his rules, such as ‘Musical came
to be from white’ (i.e. the white thing became musical) and ‘The statue came to be from bronze’ can be paraphrased in
his terms as ‘Musical came to be from unmusical (which was coincidentally white)’ and ‘The statue-shape came to be
from shapelessness (in the bronze)’ (188a31–b2).63
Aristotle argues inadequately for his proposals. To show that we can redescribe the termini of becoming in his
preferred ways is not to show that we should or must. He will convince us on this further point if he shows that his
description of the termini displays properties with regular law-like connexions. But he does not show it. If someone is
unmusical, that explains why a change is needed for him to be musical; but it does not explain why the change happens,
since someone could be unmusical and tone-deaf, and incapable of becoming musical. Similarly, all sorts of things lack
the shape of a statue; but this lack is insufﬁcient to explain the coming to be of a statue.64
Aristotle does not appeal to any consensus among his predecessors to support his claim that a subject as well as two
contraries must be present in every change; he merely suggests that it is reasonable (echei tina logon, 189a21–2) to admit
the third element. His reasons for admitting it rely on acceptance of the general outlook of the Categories.65 He assumes
he can fairly rely on the Categories to describe what seems reasonable to common sense.
If Aristotle is right about the Categories, he has found a dialectical defence for the belief in a subject and two contraries.
He has not explained why we should accept this belief as a true account of actual changes in the world. But he has not
set out to explain this; in this respect he has observed the restrictions imposed by his initial account of dialectical
argument. In another respect, though, he has exceeded the limits of pure dialectic. His initial determinist assumption,
ruling out random processes, does not seem warranted by common beliefs. Ordinary descriptions of the termini do
not exclude random transitions of the sort that he wants to avoid. Here, as in the Categories, Aristotle selects and
interprets common beliefs in the light of further assumptions that control his dialectical argument.
It would be exaggerated to claim that Aristotle appeals only to

72

CHAPTER 3 § 37

common beliefs, or that he uses dialectic simply to show that common sense is consistent. But this claim represents an
important part of the truth about his exposition of the categories, and about his anti-Eleatic argument; and it ascribes a
consistent position to him. His actual position is less clear; for sometimes he takes a more ambitious line. In his
treatment of essence, and in his appeal to a determinist assumption, he does not seem to appeal simply to common
beliefs; and sometimes he claims to ﬁnd objective principles. But pure dialectic does not seem to justify this more
ambitious line.

4 Puzzles About Substance
38. Substances and Subjects
In the previous chapter I examined Aristotle's exposition and use of the doctrine of substance, to show that he defends
it by appeal to common beliefs, and that this sort of defence limits the capacity of dialectic to defend ﬁrst principles. In
this chapter I turn to a further difﬁculty in the dialectical account of substance. The difﬁculties I have described so far
mostly arise even if Aristotle is right to claim that common beliefs support his doctrine of substance; for even if they
support it, they do not show that it describes any objective principles. But his difﬁculties are still more severe if in fact
common beliefs do not uniquely support Aristotle's doctrine any more than they support other views incompatible
with his.
I will show that this difﬁculty actually arises for Aristotle's doctrine of ﬁrst substance. First I will examine the
conditions assumed in the Categories for being a basic subject; then I will turn again to Physics i, to argue that the
indeterminacy of common beliefs implies a fatal weakness in Aristotle's defence of his own conception of basic
subjects against the rival views that make only matter a basic subject. First we need to see how the question about basic
subjects arises.
We have discussed strong predication and inherence to see how to distinguish substances from non-substances. But
even if we grasp strong predication and inherence, this is not enough; for the results we get by applying this distinction
depend on our initial choice of subjects. We can rule out all those subjects that are either inherent in or strongly
predicated of further subjects; but we are still left with too many subjects for Aristotle's purposes.
Aristotle can defend his claim that ‘The individual man is a musician’ expresses inherence rather than strong
predication, by arguing that musicality is not essential to a man. But to show that musicality is not strongly predicated
of a man is not to show that musicians are not substances. For ‘the individual musician is a musician’ expresses strong
predication; and an individual musician (as opposed to his musicality) is not inherent in a man; musicians therefore
seem to be ﬁrst substances. If they are not, then some apparent subjects are not substances. For if we just use the
intuitive notion of a subject as a bearer of essential properties

74

CHAPTER 4 § 38

that can persist through change, musicians seem to be as reasonable subjects as men, and Aristotle will have to
recognize more ﬁrst and second substances than he wants to.
The extent of Aristotle's difﬁculties is especially clear in his discussion of relatives; for here he commits himself to
reliance on grammatical and linguistic arguments that imply the existence of too many substances. A relative is
essentially ‘of ’ something else that is its correlative (e.g., double and half, big and small, master and slave).1 In ﬁnding
the correlatives we must use exactly the right term. It will not do to say that a rudder is of a boat or that a wing is of a
bird; we must say that the correlatives are the ruddered and the winged (Catg. 6b36–7a22). This correlativity applies to
descriptions, not to the existence of the things described. Knowledge and the knowable, perception and the
perceptible, are correlatives, but the knowable and the perceptible can exist without being known or perceived
(7b15–8a12).
The dependence of relatives on descriptions is clearest from Aristotle's efforts to show that no substances are relatives.
He remarks that we do not call a particular hand ‘someone's some individual hand’ but ‘someone's hand’ (8a15–21).
This argument proves only that ‘some individual hand’ does not combine with a genitive in the way that other relatives
do; it hardly follows that the referent of the expression, the individual hand, does not essentially belong to something.
Worse still, the argument seems to apply equally to particular relatives; we will not call a particular equal ‘some equal to
something’, but ‘equal to something’, and so on for the other examples. The argument seems to prove too much,
because it concentrates too narrowly on relative expressions.2
In trying to prove that no substance is a relative, Aristotle assumes that we know what the substances are, and that they
do not include any relatives. But his assumptions are dubious. For many acknowledged relatives seem to be substances,
in so far as they admit classifying nouns and characterizing adjectives, and have essential and coincidental properties.
We can apparently say that this slave is a man, and that hence he is an animal and a substance. Similarly, he can
apparently undergo change and receive contraries; and hence he has the proprium of ﬁrst substance.
The slave is a man only coincidentally (7a25–b14), and so man is not strongly predicated of him; if he is a ﬁrst
substance, man cannot be a second substance. ‘The slave is a man’ must apparently express inherence, and if an
inherent item cannot be a substance, then apparently man cannot be a substance. If, on the other hand, we say that
man is a second substance, because it is strongly predicated of the individual man, we seem to have equally good
reason to claim that musician and

CHAPTER 4 § 38

75

slave are second substances because they are strongly predicated of the individual musician and the individual slave.
Aristotle wants to claim that, on the contrary, man and horse are second substances, while musicians and slaves are
not, because man and horse say what the ﬁrst substances are. But the truth of this claim seems to depend on the
descriptions we choose to use. ‘Slave’ picks out a subject that is not essentially a man; ‘man’ picks out a subject that is
essentially a man. Different choices of descriptions seem to pick out different subjects and different substances.3
But if ‘slave’ picks out something that is both a ﬁrst substance and a relative, then one and the same item belongs in
two categories.4 Sometimes, indeed, Aristotle allows this, but with bad results. He argues that some speciﬁc states, e.g.
grammatical knowledge or virtue, are qualities, but their genus, state, is a relative, because it must be a state ‘of ’
something (of virtue, knowledge, etc.) (6b2–6).5 For similar reasons the genus knowledge is a relative, because it is
knowledge ‘of ’ something (grammar etc.), but the species of knowledge are not relatives because grammatical
knowledge is not called ‘grammatical knowledge of grammar’ (11a20–38). The reasons for assigning these genera and
species to different categories rely wholly on features of the genus-words and the species-words. Aristotle relies on
grammatical tests for placing things into categories, and in deﬁning the class of relatives he pushes this method to
extremes.
The extremes seem to be disastrous. Since the category is said of the genus, and strong predication is transitive, the
category of the genus will also be said of the species and of their individual instances, just as substance is said of
animal, man, and the individual man. Hence speciﬁc types of knowledge, e.g., will also be relatives. But since different
categories have different propria, speciﬁc states must both have and lack the propria of their different categories.
Aristotle's appeal to grammatical tests for relatives has forced him into a serious conﬂict with his general conception of
categories. The arguments about relatives make it especially clear that he must choose between his grammatical
arguments and his ontological doctrines. In the Categories he tries to maintain both; but the combination results in
incoherence.
Aristotle therefore damages his doctrine of categories by uncritically following the grammatical tests that support his
claims about relatives. He needs to limit his appeal to grammatical tests. But then he needs some further, not purely
grammatical, test to distinguish genuine from merely apparent subjects.6

76

CHAPTER 4 § 39

39. Basic Subjects
We have suggested that for each statement about inherence we can ﬁnd or coin a count-noun to yield a strong
predication (so that we transform ‘The man is musical’ into ‘The musician is a musician’). But Aristotle might reply
that the subject of the strong predication is itself no more than a compound of a ﬁrst substance and one of its inherent
properties (man plus musicality), and that therefore it is not a distinct subject in its own right, beyond the man and his
musicality. We see that being a musician is not essential to being a man; and if we are willing to trust our judgments
about essential properties that far, we can say that the man is a more basic subject than the musician.
In the Categories Aristotle does not mention more and less basic subjects. But in the De Interpretatione he argues that if G
and H are simply coincidents of the F, and so inherent in the F, there is no one subject consisting of the F plus G and
H.
However many things are said coincidentally, either both of the same thing or one of them of the other, these will
not be one. A man, e.g., is musical and white, but the white and the musical are not one thing; for they are both
coincidents to the same thing. And even if it is true to say that the white is musical, still the musical white will not be
one thing; for it is coincidentally that the musical is white, so that the white will not be musical. (De Int. 21a8–14)7
Whether or not we describe the subject with a single word is irrelevant; ‘biped animal’ picks out a single subject, but a
single word meaning ‘white musical thing’ would not (20b15–19). Aristotle has equally good reason for denying that
‘musician’ picks out a single subject; the genuine subject picked out is the man (not the musician), and musician is not
said of him. He can therefore deny that the individual musician is a ﬁrst substance.
The apparent subjects that Aristotle rejects are not genuine subjects in their own right, but mere combinations; and
only genuine subjects in their own right are ﬁrst substances. We might say that the musician is a mere combination
because every musician is a man in whom musicality is inherent, and that in general any combination of a subject and
an inherent item is not itself a basic subject, and therefore not a substance. Though this notion of a basic subject does
not appear in the Categories, it seems necessary to support Aristotle's choice of men and horses, rather than musicians
or white things, as ﬁrst substances.
This test for being a basic subject will lead us back to where we started if we try to identify inherence by the existence
or non-existence of the appropriate abstract noun. This is simply a question about a particular language, and it might
turn out that one language recognizes ﬁrst

CHAPTER 4 § 40

77

substances that another language counts as merely inherent items. Aristotle, however, does not intend this. He believes,
for example, that the ontological relation underlying paronymy may be present even if the non-substantial property has
no name at all, or if it is not the right name for paronymy.8 Outside the Categories his view is still clearer; in the passage
cited from the De Interpretatione he does not think his conclusion is affected at all by the existence or non-existence of a
name in a language. We will have to identify inherence by appeal to our beliefs about which properties are or are not
essential to a subject; and this means we need some beliefs about genuine subjects and their essential properties.
On this point the Categories seems to let us down. The intuitive tests it applies seem to rely on a previous grasp of some
non-intuitive conditions that control the intuitive judgments. If the dialectical arguments and conditions are applied
without preconceptions, they seem to yield rather superﬁcial conclusions about common beliefs, indeed about the
common beliefs and assumptions embodied in a particular language. But it is not clear how we reach the right
judgments about subjects and essences, or how we are to combine them with common beliefs.
We are readily inclined to believe that men and horses differ from colours and sizes, in being more like subjects; and we
may agree that they seem to be more basic than white things and musicians. But we have no assurance that they are
really basic subjects, if we do not know that the same judgments that make them more basic than musicians will not
make some other subjects more basic still. The Categories gives us no assurance that its candidates are really genuine
ﬁrst substances.

40. Matter
This difﬁculty is sharpened by some less prominent examples of substances in the Categories. Evidently, Aristotle's
standard examples of ﬁrst substances are individual organisms, members of natural kinds. But he also allows parts of
substances, e.g. heads and hands (3a29–32, 8a13–28), bodies (2b1–2), bits of matter, e.g. logs (8a23), and stuffs, e.g.
honey (9a33). These last four examples of substance challenge the more usual examples.9
We denied that musicians are ﬁrst substances, by arguing that they are just paronyms, reﬂecting the inherence of a
coincident, musicality, in a genuine subject, a man. But if a statue is made of bronze, why should we not say that it is
also simply a paronym? Apparently, the bronze is the subject and the statue-shape is the quality inherent in it. Similarly,

78

CHAPTER 4 § 41

on this view, the ﬂesh and bones of an animal are the subject, and the capacities of the animal are inherent qualities.
Since Aristotle recognizes both shapes and capacities as qualities (9a14–27, 10a11–16), this paronymous analysis seems
natural for him; but then the test that explains why musicians are not substances seems to imply that organisms are not
substances either.
This difﬁculty is most vivid if we remember that the capacity to persist and receive contraries seems most special to
ﬁrst substance. When a musician comes into being, this is simply an alteration in his subject, the man, from one
inherent quality to its contrary. But when a statue comes into being, the bronze undergoes a change from lacking a
shape to having it, and when an organism comes into being, its constituents undergo a change between contraries. If a
man or horse comes into being, then, why is this not simply a change from one contrary to another?10
These puzzles are not mentioned in the Categories. They become very important in other works, and especially in the
Metaphysics. But they are worth remarking here, since they unavoidably arise for the conception of substance presented
in the Categories.
The puzzles expose limitations of dialectic. Dialectic uses both the intuitive, grammatical tests that are prominent in
the Categories, and the concepts of essence, proprium, and coincident; and these concepts, especially essence, restrict the
range of substance, by excluding some candidates that seem to pass the more intuitive tests. Once we ﬁx our subjects,
dialectic answers further questions, but it does not ﬁx the range of subjects. Aristotle mentions only the intuitive tests
used in the Categories, because his use of them is guided by a view about what the subjects are. He is convinced that
individual men and horses are obvious and paradigmatic subjects. But he does not defend this conviction.

41. Universals
First substances in the Categories are important because they are subjects both for non-substances and for second
substances. We have seen some ways Aristotle takes substances to be prior to items in non-substance categories and to
combinations of subjects and inherent properties. To appreciate the full importance of ﬁrst substances, though, we
must see how they are related to universals, especially to second substances. Some of Aristotle's claims depend on his
own rather controversial views about the nature of universals.
Universals appear in the initial division of beings (1a20), and Aristotle never retracts the claim that they are beings. He
therefore accepts

CHAPTER 4 § 41

79

metaphysical realism, and rejects nominalism, since he believes that universals are genuine beings distinct from
particulars and from the names or concepts applying to particulars.11 Since second substances are subjects, and subjects
are beings, second substances must be beings; and since non-substantial speciﬁc universals are subjects for generic
ones, they must also be beings. Moreover, Aristotle insists that some substances do not signify a this.
Every substance seems to signify a this. With ﬁrst substances, it is indisputably true that each of them signiﬁes a
this; for what is revealed is an individual and numerically one. In the case of second substances, it appears from the
character of the name—whenever one speaks of man or animal—that a second substance also signiﬁes a this; but
this is not true. Rather, it signiﬁes a such (poion ti); for the subject is not one, as the primary substance is, but man
and animal are said of many things. But it does not signify a such unconditionally, as pale does; for pale signiﬁes
nothing other than such, whereas the species and the genus demarcate such about substance, since they signify
substance of such a sort. (3b10–21).12
If he did not believe in the reality of universals, he could have claimed that all substances are thises (since they would all
be particulars).13
When Aristotle calls second substances species and genera, and says ﬁrst substances ‘belong in’ them (huparchein en,
2a14–15), we might take him to mean that second substances are classes of which ﬁrst substances are members.
Classes, however, are deﬁned extensionally, so that two classes with the same members are the same class; and if
Aristotle thinks second substances are classes, he cannot plausibly claim that they reveal what ﬁrst substances are
(2b29–37). Since the class of men is coextensive with the class of grammarians (i.e. things capable of grammatical
knowledge), it follows that if man reveals what particular men are, grammarian must reveal it also. But grammarian is a
proprium of man, and though the proprium is necessarily coextensive with the species (Top. 102a18–23), it is not
identical to the species, since it does not reveal the essence (102a18). Aristotle must assume that ‘F reveals the essence
of G’ does not allow the substitution of coreferential terms for ‘F’, and that the species man cannot be deﬁned
extensionally; hence it cannot be a class.
If the species man (e.g.) is not a class, might it be the essential property shared by all the members of the class?
Aristotle's deﬁnition of a universal does not make clear the relation between universals and properties. He says:
By universal I mean what is of a nature to be predicated (pephuke katêgoreisthai) in the case of a plurality of things, and
by particular I mean what is not. (De Int. 17a39–40)

80

CHAPTER 4 § 42

Since ‘of a nature to be predicated’ is ambiguous between ‘must by its nature’ and ‘can by its nature’, it is not clear if
Aristotle takes the existence of a universal to require actual plural instantiation. If plural instantiation is required,
universals cannot be properties, since the existence of the property of being a man does not need plural instances.
Aristotle takes actual instantiation to be necessary for the existence of a universal. For he remarks that if everyone is
healthy health exists and sickness does not, and if everything is pale-coloured dark colour does not exist (Catg.
14a6–10). Since the situations imagined here seem perfectly possible within the laws of nature recognized by Aristotle,
it seems possible for some universals to come into and go out of existence.14
This remark about actual instantiation, together with the deﬁnition of a universal, supports a further demand for plural
instantiation. For the deﬁnition either requires possible plural instantiation or requires actual plural instantiation; but if
it supports the claim about actual instantiation, it cannot merely require possible plural instantiation, but must be taken
to require actual plural instantiation.15
Moreover, Aristotle assumes that a second substance is not one in number, because it is said of many subjects
(3b16–18); it is not a single individual existing in one place at one time, but will be one in species, as water is (Top.
103a14–23). If there is more than one individual man, then the universal man (Aristotle seems to argue) cannot be
numerically one, since it exists in the many places where the individuals exist. But if only one man exists, the property
of being a man exists just where he exists, and therefore seems to be no less a this than he is. Since Aristotle believes
universals are not thises, he seems to assume that they necessarily have plural instances, and therefore that they are not
simply properties.16 The universal, therefore, seems to be a non-unit class, intensionally conceived (e.g., in so far as it is
the class of men rather than of grammarians).17

42. The Dependent Status of Universals
In claiming that particulars are ﬁrst substances, Aristotle means to claim not only that they are ﬁrst in some order (e.g.
ascending from particular to universal, or looking for subjects with no further subjects), but also that they are the best
substances. For he says the particular non-inherent subject is called substance ‘most fully and primarily and more than
anything else’ (kuriôtata kai prôtôs kai malista, 2a11–12). To defend this claim he must especially explain why ‘second’,
universal substances are not substance to as high a degree as particular substances are.

CHAPTER 4 § 42

81

He seems to rely heavily on the claim that ﬁrst substances are subjects more than other things are. He says: ‘First
substances are called substances most fully because they are subjects for all the other things’ (2b36–3a1). This would
be a good reason if the subject-criterion were the primary criterion for being a substance. But Aristotle has not
explained why we should prefer the subject-criterion to the essence-criterion. If particulars meet the subject-criterion
better, universals seem to meet the essence-criterion better; and so even if they are secondary as subjects, they may be
primary as essences.
In his introduction of universals Aristotle does not explicitly rely on any previous grasp of the notion of a universal; he
speaks of individuals, thises, and particulars, and introduces universals as the things said of them. Apparently he relies
on our intuitive grasp of predication to show us what a universal is. By introducing universals this way, he suggests that
they are secondary to particulars; but we will accept this suggestion only if we begin with the subject-criterion. If we
begin with the essence-criterion and ask what things are, our ﬁrst substances will be man, horse, red, square, etc., and
the subjects of these properties will be second substances.
Aristotle's claim is justiﬁed if he can show that substance as subject is prior in some relevant way to substance as
essence. The most relevant types of priority that he recognizes are (1) asymmetrical existential dependence (the
existence of B requires the existence of A, but the converse does not hold, 14a29–35); and (2) asymmetrical
explanation (neither A nor B can exist without the other, but the existence of A explains the existence of B, and the
converse does not hold, 14b10–13).18 But Aristotle does not argue adequately in the Categories for the claim that
particulars are prior in either way.
Aristotle claims that other things besides ﬁrst substances are either said of or inherent in ﬁrst substances.
All other things are either said of the ﬁrst substances as subjects, or are in them as subjects. This is evident if we
examine particular cases. Animal, e.g., is predicated of man, and so also of the individual man; for if it is not
predicated of any individual man, neither is it predicated of man at all. Again, colour is in body, and so also in some
individual body; for if it is not in some one of the individual bodies, neither is it in body at all. Hence all the other
things are either said of the primary substances as subjects, or are in them as subjects. If, then, the ﬁrst substances
do not exist, then neither can anything else exist. (2a34–b6c)19
The conclusion shows that he takes the previous claim to mean that universals exist only in so far as they are said of, or
inherent in, particular substances.
If a universal is inherent in a particular substance, then clearly it

82

CHAPTER 4 § 43

depends on that substance, since inherence implies existential dependence. But it is not clear why we should concede
that colour (e.g.) is inherent in a body. If we believe in separated Platonic universals, existing independently of
particulars instantiating them, we will reject Aristotle's claim about inherence. His case is even weaker for strong
predication. Aristotle needs some further reason to show that second substances exist only if they are said of some ﬁrst
substance or other.20
It turns out that a principal claim in the Categories, the dependence of other beings on ﬁrst substances, rests on no
explicit argument. Aristotle's claim is not surprising, in the light of his other claims about universals. For we have seen
that he takes instantiation, and probably takes plural instantiation, to be necessary for the existence of universals. Since
instantiation requires strong predication or inherence, Aristotle's conception of universals does indeed require them to
be strongly predicated of particulars. But he gives no argument in the Categories for the correctness of his conception of
universals.

43. The Independence of First Substances
Though Aristotle does not argue for the dependence of universals on ﬁrst substances, it is at least clear that he believes
it. It is probable, but less clear, that he believes in the independence of ﬁrst substances from universals. First
substances are supposed to be substances more than anything else because they are subjects for everything else
(2b36–3a1). If, however, ﬁrst substances are equally dependent on other things (even though the other things are not
their subjects), then those other beings will be equally basic for the existence of anything else; and mutual dependence
seems to challenge the claim of ﬁrst substances to be substances most of all.21 Apparently, then, Aristotle ought to
argue for the independence of ﬁrst substances.
If the existence of an individual man is sufﬁcient for the existence of the universal man, it is self-contradictory to claim
that the individual is independent of the universal.22 But if universals require plural instantiation, Socrates' existence
does not require the existence of the universal man, pale, etc. Socrates, therefore, is independent of the universals. The
demand for plural instantiation leads directly to the independence of ﬁrst substance; and it might even explain why
Aristotle does not bother to argue for the dependence of universals and the independence of particulars.
This conception of universals, however, does not support a very interesting sort of priority for ﬁrst substances. Even if
a particular man does not require the existence of the universal, he requires one instantiation of man. This one
instantiation implies the existence of the

CHAPTER 4 § 44

83

property of being a man, so that the particular man seems to be dependent on the property. The property does not
seem to be the same as the individual man, since the spatio-temporal properties that are essential to him are not
essential to it (it would exist if Callias existed and Socrates did not). Aristotle does not recognize such a thing as being a
man, distinct from the particular and the universal; but he seems to need it, and it raises further questions about any
claim of independence for ﬁrst substances.
Further difﬁculties arise in explaining how ﬁrst substances are independent of particular non-substances. For though
the individual man is not necessarily pale, must he not have an instance of some colour or other? In any case, not every
inherent property is a non-necessary property; the special property of the species (e.g. capacity for knowledge, in the
case of man) is inherent, but necessary. Necessary inherent properties seem to depend on their ﬁrst substance no more
than it depends on them. The argument about asymmetrical dependence seems to show that, e.g., the individual
capacity for grammar is as much a ﬁrst substance as the individual man is; for each of them depends on another
particular that also depends on it.23
If Aristotle maintains the independence of ﬁrst substances, he can defend his view that they are primary. He may not
have seen the difﬁculties in showing that ﬁrst substances are independent; for we have raised difﬁculties by appealing
to two sorts of items (substantial properties with only one instance; necessary inherent particulars) that are not
mentioned in the Categories. His assumptions about universals and about non-substances need defence.
The primacy of ﬁrst substances need not depend on their independence of other things. Aristotle could claim that they
are primarily and most of all substances because they are prior in explanation to other things, just as the facts are prior
to the true propositions that correspond to them, even though both must exist at the same time (14b10–22). But he
does not exploit this possibility. He fails to face the crucial issues that arise for his claims about ﬁrst substances. We saw
that his views about ﬁrst substances depend on controversial assumptions about essences and basic subjects; and our
present discussion shows that his belief in the primacy of particular substances depends on controversial assumptions
about the nature of universals.

44. Weaknesses of Dialectic
The Categories practises ‘logical’ dialectic, in so far as it argues from common sense about questions that are not
conﬁned to the scope of any speciﬁc science, for conclusions that are presupposed equally by each

84

CHAPTER 4 § 45

speciﬁc science. Does it advance from what is prior and better-known to us to what is prior and better-known
by nature?
We might think that Aristotle only tries to make explicit the ontological distinctions implied in ordinary beliefs and in
their reﬂexion in grammar. Indeed, we have seen that some arguments in the Categories, and some of the conclusions
(e.g. those on differentiae) display the inﬂuence of common sense and of attention to grammatical distinctions.
Excessive attention to these distinctions (e.g. on relatives and qualities) leads to anomalies.
And yet the main aim of the Categories is not to describe even an idealized version of common sense. Aristotle's
conception of substance and non-substance cannot be adequately defended from common sense; it requires a fuller
account of genuine subjects and genuine essences than we can ﬁnd in the Categories. The distinction between strong
predication and inherence, for instance, is not adequately explained; and it must be applied to the right sorts of
subjects, which we must already identify, apart from the distinctions drawn in the Categories.
It is easy to overlook the weakness of arguments based on intuitive distinctions, because many of Aristotle's candidates
for substance—particular men, horses, and other members of natural kinds—are not unfamiliar or surprising, as
Platonic Forms or Democritean atoms would be. Commonsense distinctions might seem to support the familiar
candidates against other candidates for substance. But an examination of the Categories suggests that this is not so.
Principles not immediately accessible to common sense are needed to take us from commonsense dialectical
arguments to the commonsense ontological conclusions that Aristotle accepts.
The Categories, then, does not succeed in its apparent purpose of arguing for the sort of ontological scheme that is
presupposed in logical dialectic, and therefore in all areas of inquiry. The conclusions of common sense and intuition
are too ambiguous and too imprecise to support the doctrines that Aristotle wants to rest on them. The support he
needs must come from the doctrines that interpret and modify intuition and common sense; but these doctrines
themselves must be justiﬁed, not simply taken for granted. The Categories is a partial introduction to some of Aristotle's
views, but not an adequate exposition or defence of them.

45. Principles of Change
In Physics i 7 Aristotle applies his doctrine of subject and substance to the understanding of natural change. He believes
that his doctrine removes

CHAPTER 4 § 45

85

the paradoxes and puzzles resulting from the view of his predecessors, and supports his belief that natural organisms,
as well as their matter, are genuine subjects of change. A discussion of his argument will show that the objections
raised against the dialectical argument of the Categories still apply; for the commonsense distinctions that Aristotle
appeals to do not uniquely support his conclusion over rival views.
Aristotle argues that changes, as they are ordinarily understood, can be recognized and described without selfcontradiction or paradox. His predecessors argued:
Nothing that is comes to be or perishes, since whatever comes to be must come to be either from what is or from
what is not, and it is impossible to come to be from either. For what is does not come to be, since it already is; and
nothing comes to be from what is not, since something must be a subject. (191a27–31)
Aristotle wants to show that each of these alternatives is in a way true of what comes to be, and in a way false; and the
way each is true and false allows becoming to be coherently described. The tripartite analysis, including the two
contraries and the subject, shows us how to describe the termini consistently. We dissolve the puzzle about becoming
by showing that its premisses are true, but in a sense that makes them consistent with each other and with the
possibility of becoming.
The puzzle arises because things seem to come to be either from what is or from what is not, in the senses that suggest
the impossibility of becoming. We may say ‘The unmusical man became musical’ (e.g. 190a4–5); and since unmusical
man has passed away, there seems to be becoming from what is not—there would be no becoming if the unmusical
man remained the whole time. Similarly, when we say ‘It became musical from unmusical’, nothing unmusical survives
when the musical has come to be, and so there seems to be becoming from what is not.24 If the only two items
involved are the musical and the unmusical, they seem to imply a succession of things—the perishing of the unmusical
and the coming to be of the musical—with no account of how the items are related.
Aristotle argues, however, that there is always both a persisting subject and a non-persisting contrary. A full description
says that the man who was unmusical becomes musical because he had the quality unmusicality and has lost it,
acquiring its contrary, musicality. Other descriptions are true, but less informative, because they do not refer to the
items involved in the change under the appropriate full descriptions. We can say ‘The unmusical man became musical’,
and ‘The unmusicality (to amouson) became musicality’, because we refer coincidentally to the appropriate items. The
subject has different property-instances that are one in number, since they belong to the same particular subject, but

86

CHAPTER 4 § 45

different in ‘being’ (191a1–3) or ‘form’ (190a13–17), allowing us to refer to that subject in different ways.25
So far Aristotle has considered cases of becoming where, as we ordinarily conceive subjects, the same particular subject
(e.g. the man) remains in being and no new subject comes into being. He calls this ‘becoming this’ (e.g. musical), and
contrasts it with ‘unconditional’ or ‘unqualiﬁed’ becoming, in which a subject comes to be, and does not merely come
to be something.
Things are said to come to be in many ways. Some are said not to come to be but to become this; only substances
are said to come to be unconditionally. In the other cases it is evident that there must be some subject that comes to
be. For in fact, when 〈something 〉 becomes of some quantity, or quality, or relative to another, or somewhere,
something is subject, since it is only substance that is never said of any other subject, while all the other things are
said of substance. However, substances—the things that are unconditionally—also come to be from some subject;
this will become evident if we examine it. In every case there is something that is a subject, from which the thing
coming to be proceeds—as plants and animals come to be from seed. Some things that come to be unconditionally
do so by change of ﬁgure (e.g. a statue); some by addition (e.g. growing things); some by subtraction (e.g. Hermes
from the stone); some by composition (e.g. a house); some by alteration (e.g. things changing according to their
matter). And it is evident that everything that comes to be in this way comes to be from a subject. (190a31–b10).
The puzzles of becoming reappear for unconditional becoming. For if a new subject comes into being, it did not exist
previously, and so must have come into being from what is not; if, on the other hand, the same subject persists, no new
subject seems to come into being.
In reply, Aristotle returns to his tripartite analysis. Qualiﬁed becoming requires a persisting subject because the nonsubstances are all said of substance (190a33–b1). Substance, unlike non-substances, is not said of a subject, but, like
them, it comes to be from a subject (190b1–3), and the tripartite analysis will work for unqualiﬁed becoming also.
When a statue comes to be, the subject is bronze, the privation shapelessness, and the contrary that is gained is statueshape (190b10–17).
Some variation is allowed in the analysis. We say that the man becomes musical from the contrary, not from the
subject; but we can say that the statue came to be from the bronze, which, unlike the contrary, persists (190a24–6).26
This is intelligible; for the original subject of qualiﬁed becoming (the unmusical man) is the same substance as the
substance that results from the process (the musical man), but in unqualiﬁed becoming the resultant substance (the
statue) is not the same substance as the original subject (the bronze). Something new emerges

CHAPTER 4 § 46

87

from the unmusical (in qualiﬁed becoming) and from the bronze (in unqualiﬁed becoming). When this allowance is
made for the explicable differences, we need not doubt that the tripartite analysis applies to these cases as well as to
qualiﬁed becoming.
Since the analysis works for both types of becoming, Aristotle thinks he has solved the paradoxes that seemed to cast
doubt on the possibility of change. We need not suppose that change is from what is, or from what is not, in any
objectionable sense. It is from both, in a coherent and intelligible sense.

46. Puzzles About Unqualied Becoming
The analysis relies on the doctrine of the Categories. Aristotle shows how the puzzles of becoming are solved if we
recognize that the persisting subject of change is a ﬁrst substance, and that a substance has no contrary. Since the
successive items (e.g. unmusical and musical) are contraries, they are not substances, and hence are not the subjects of
the change; their succession is an alteration in the more basic subject (e.g. the man) that is the ﬁrst substance. Having
dissolved this puzzle through the doctrine of the categories, we appeal to the same doctrine to describe the difference
between unqualiﬁed becoming and alteration; if we know what sort of thing a ﬁrst substance is, we can say that
unqualiﬁed becoming occurs when one of these comes into being. The principles of logical dialectic seem to remove
puzzles surrounding the ﬁrst principles of natural science, and so seem to support Aristotle's claim that dialectic has a
road to ﬁrst principles.
We have argued, however, that in fact purely dialectical argument does not secure conclusions as speciﬁc as the ones
Aristotle actually afﬁrms; though he seems to rely on intuitive distinctions, he cannot justiﬁably rely on these alone. A
similar question arises about his use of his doctrines in explaining becoming. He speaks as though they support his
claim, but in fact he needs some further defence.
Aristotle claims both (i) that unqualiﬁed becoming can be coherently described, and (ii) that it is exempliﬁed when his
familiar ﬁrst substances come to be and perish. Both claims raise questions.
Questions about the ﬁrst claim arise from a comparison of the account of unqualiﬁed becoming with the deﬁnition of
ﬁrst substance. Unqualiﬁed becoming requires a substance (e.g. a statue) to come into being; but Aristotle insists that it
must have a subject (e.g. the bronze) preceding it. In the Categories, however, he deﬁnes a ﬁrst substance as a basic
subject, neither said of nor inherent in any further subject. This deﬁnition seems to make the bronze a ﬁrst substance,
since it is the

88

CHAPTER 4 § 47

subject of becoming. But the statue seems not to be a basic subject, since it has a more basic subject, the bronze; hence
it seems not to be a ﬁrst substance at all. The description of unqualiﬁed becoming seems to be incoherent.
To answer this objection Aristotle must show either that the bronze is not a ﬁrst substance or that it is one, but does
not threaten the claim of the statue to be a ﬁrst substance. The ﬁrst answer would be hard to defend, since the criteria
for substance seem to leave no room for objections. To defend the second answer, he must show that the statue is
neither said of nor inherent in the bronze. It is not said of the bronze; but why is it not inherent? Since the nature and
persistence of a bit of bronze do not require it to be statue-shaped, the statue-shape is clearly not an essential property
of the bronze; why then is it not merely a quality of it, and therefore inherent?
The analysis in the Physics does not answer this question. We might say that the statue is a ﬁrst substance, because
‘statue’ is the name of a subject, not of one of the contrary properties. But ‘musician’ also looks like the name of a
subject, not of a property; and yet Aristotle regards the coming to be of a musician as a qualiﬁed becoming, since the
musician is analysable into a genuine subject with an inherent property. If we redescribe the alleged unqualiﬁed
becoming of the statue as a qualiﬁed becoming in which the bronze acquires a new quality, why is this not the correct
description?27
Aristotle can fairly appeal to common beliefs for (1) the belief in the unqualiﬁed becoming of statues, horses, etc.; (2)
the subject-criterion for substance; (3) the characteristic expressions that distinguish qualiﬁed from unqualiﬁed
becoming. But in this case common beliefs do not seem coherent; the subject-criterion seems to imply that the bronze
is a substance, that the coming to be of a statue is merely a qualiﬁed becoming, and therefore that the statue is not a
ﬁrst substance. Moreover, appeals to the ordinary expressions in (3) do not support the candidates for substance that
are recognized both by Aristotle and by common sense; for ordinary descriptions show no relevant difference between
the becoming of a musician and of a statue. Aristotle's discussion suggests that mere dialectic cannot adequately
defend common beliefs, since the common beliefs themselves raise difﬁculties that merely endoxic principles do not
resolve.

47. Matter as Substance
Aristotle has introduced the subject of unqualiﬁed becoming—the bronze, wood, etc. from which the statue or the box
comes to be; and

CHAPTER 4 § 48

89

his analysis suggests that this formless subject has the best claim to be the ﬁrst substance. He generalizes from these
examples and describes the subject of unqualiﬁed becoming as ‘matter’.28 Clearly matter has a strong claim to be
substance, since it is a subject; and it seems to undermine the claim of the ‘ordinary’ substance to be a ﬁrst substance,
since a ﬁrst substance cannot be said of a subject, and the ordinary substance seems to be said of its matter.29
Once Aristotle admits this much, he may seem to be committed to further surprising claims about ﬁrst substance.
Bronze is the matter and subject of the statue; but bronze is itself composed of further matter, which must be its
subject, and this matter is composed of further matter. If no ﬁrst substance can be said of a subject, then apparently
the only ﬁrst substance is the most basic or ‘prime’ matter that we reach by this process of analysis.30
Aristotle need not, however, accept this argument. He does not concede that x's matter is the subject of which x is said;
he distinguishes being said of a subject from being ‘from’ or ‘out of ’ a subject (190a31–b3), and allows only that x's
matter is the subject out of which x is made. He leaves open the possibility that x is out of a further subject y, but not
said of y, so that x satisﬁes the subject-criterion for substance.
This possibility might vindicate the account of ﬁrst substance in the Categories. While Physics i shows that matter satisﬁes
the subject-criterion, the Categories allows this also, and the Physics seems to develop rather than reject the position of
the Categories. The Physics has not yet been shown to undermine the assumption in the Categories that men and horses are
ﬁrst substances because they are basic subjects.
But though this possibility is open, it remains to be seen whether anything satisﬁes it. So far no reason has appeared for
treating statues differently from musicians. To defend his assumption in the Categories that horses are substances and
musicians are not, Aristotle must claim that a substance is a basic subject, not a mere combination of a subject and an
inherent non-essential property. But any conception of a basic subject that favours horses over musicians seems to
favour the bronze over the statue, and hence the matter of horses over horses. Though Aristotle must assume that a
ﬁrst substance is a basic subject, one reasonable conception of a basic subject seems to threaten his own candidates for
substance.

48. Form as Substance
Aristotle himself is not completely satisﬁed with the results for his view of substance. He says: ‘Whether the form or
the subject is substance is

90

CHAPTER 4 § 48

not yet clear’ (Phys. 191a19–20). If the answer is not clear, why might the subject seem not to be substance, and why
might the form seem a better candidate? If Aristotle accepts the subject-criterion, as he seems to (190a35–b1), then it
should apparently be clear that the subject, and hence the matter rather than the form, is substance.31
Aristotle, however, contrasts matter with a this, claiming that matter is not one or a being in the way a this is
(191a12–13). The claim that thisness and numerical unity are necessary for being a ﬁrst substance is familiar from the
Categories; there, indeed, numerical unity seems to be indistinguishable from thisness (3b10–13), and the two conditions
seem to be more or less equivalent accounts of a particular.32 These necessary conditions for being a ﬁrst substance do
not seem to rule out matter. For bits of matter seem to be particulars no less than particular statues or horses are; for if
they are not, they can hardly be basic subjects, and Aristotle does not deny that they are basic subjects. In suggesting
that matter might not be numerically one or a this in the way a substance should be, he implies that something could
be a subject without satisfying these other conditions; but he does not explain how this could be so.
If Aristotle thinks that matter fails to be one, what condition for unity does he assume? A lump of bronze differs from
a statue in being homoeomerous; it is divisible into lumps of bronze, whereas the statue is not divisible into statues.33 If
the unity and indivisibility of a ﬁrst substance (Catg. 3b12) excludes the divisibility of homoeomerous things, then a
lump of bronze is not a ﬁrst substance.34 But then it is not clear why the divisibility of homoeomerous things is relevant
to the subject-criterion. Being numerically one and undivided (i.e. being one rather than two or more) seems necessary
for being a particular, but being a particular seems to be consistent with being homoeomerous; a 10 kg. lump divisible
into two 5 kg. lumps is one 10 kg. lump rather than two, and therefore still seems to be a particular. The claim that
nothing homoeomerous is a subject and ﬁrst substance seems to be unsupported by the Categories.
But even if matter is a questionable substance, it is not clear why form is the rival. Instead we might want to consider
the statue, which is the example used in the analogical explanation of ‘subject’: ‘As bronze is to statue . . . so the subject
nature is to substance, this, and being’ (Phys. 191a8–12). The statue seems to have the form that the bronze initially
lacked, but does not seem to be the form.
Since the statue has the bronze as well as the statue-form, it seems to consist of the bronze and the form. Indeed,
Aristotle says that everything that comes to be comes from subject and form, and that the musical man is composed of
subject and form, since his account is

CHAPTER 4 § 49

91

analysable into theirs (190b19–23). It is reasonable to extend the analysis to the statue, and to take it to be composed
of matter and form. Hence we might say that the substance to be contrasted with matter is the compound of matter
and form.
This is not, however, Aristotle's own view of the question, since he assumes that the subject and the form are the most
plausible, though not evidently successful, candidates. Perhaps he thinks that since the statue is composed of form and
matter, it seems to depend on both form and matter, and therefore seems to be a less basic subject than each of them
is. Even so, the form does not seem a plausible candidate for substance. Though the compound does not seem to be a
basic subject, it at least looks like a subject rather than a property, and therefore seems closer to being a ﬁrst substance.
Measured by this test, the form seems a poor candidate; and if it is not a subject, how can it be a ﬁrst substance?
Matter may lack the appropriate unity and thisness for a substance; but the form seems to lack them even more clearly,
since it does not seem to be a particular subject at all.
While it is surprising that Aristotle regards form as a serious candidate for being a ﬁrst substance, it seems to be a
more plausible second substance; for the statue-shape makes the second substance statue predicable of this statue. We
might infer that Aristotle confusedly introduces questions about second substance into his discussion of ﬁrst
substance.

49. Resulting Difculties
It is useful to dwell on the puzzling and tentative character of the claims about substance, because our conclusion is
very close to Aristotle's starting-point in Metaphysics vii. After his preliminary remarks on matter, compound, and form
he says:
We should dismiss the substance composed of both—I mean the one composed of matter and form—since it is
posterior and clear. And matter is also evident in a way. But we should examine the third 〈type of substance〉,
since this raises the most puzzles. (Met. 1029a30–3)
We have seen why the compound seems to be posterior, and also fairly clear; for statues seem to be clear examples of
compounds, and also to be posterior to their components. Bronze and wood seem to be clear examples of matter, and
matter seems to be a clear subject. Of all the three candidates for substance the form seems the least promising, and so
the most puzzling.
If Aristotle already had in mind the theory of Metaphysics vii when he

92

CHAPTER 4 § 49

wrote Physics i, he could easily have presented the puzzles as sharply as he does in Metaphysics vii. Since he does not
present them sharply, it is likely that he is looking tentatively for some resolution of the difﬁculties that he partly
discerns, with no deﬁnite solution in mind. The passage in Metaphysics vii suggests that we are right to be puzzled on
reading Physics i.
The arguments in Physics i show how Aristotle's views lack the support they need for the work they are required to do.
In i 6 Aristotle appeals to his own conception of substance and the other categories, and in i 7 he argues that this
general schema yields a distinction between qualiﬁed and unqualiﬁed becoming. He assumes that unqualiﬁed becoming
happens when we are inclined to say a new substance comes into being. To accept Aristotle's examples of unqualiﬁed
becomings, we must accept his examples of substances; and these face legitimate objections once we see that the
alleged unqualiﬁed becomings may be described as qualiﬁed becomings. Though common sense treats statues and
trees as substances, they seem no more substantial than musicians and white men are; if we are to be guided by reality,
we should apparently count only matter as substance, and regard other alleged substances as merely combinations of
matter and coincidental properties.
The account of change suggests that reasonable criteria for substance might recognize non-Aristotelian substances and
might disqualify Aristotelian candidates. When Aristotle appeals to common sense and the appearances, he appeals,
though selectively, both to the accepted criteria and to the accepted candidates, without saying which count for more.
When the accepted criteria seem to tell against the accepted candidates, Aristotle must decide what to modify, and on
what grounds. If dialectical argument simply seeks a consistent description of common sense, then he is free to modify
commonsense views of the criteria or of the candidates as he pleases. But if he intends to reach objective principles
from common sense, he must show that the commonsense beliefs he chooses to retain are true. This task is not
seriously undertaken in Physics i any more than in the Categories. But the Physics shows us more clearly that the task is
important, because it shows how common sense might be challenged.
Aristotle takes it for granted that we need subjects, and that we need those that common sense recognizes. He needs to
ask more persistently why and when we need to recognize what sorts of subjects. He can then deﬁne a clear issue
about whether commonsense subjects are genuine subjects or not, and we will be able to see what he or his opponent
might be right or wrong about.
In this discussion I have tried to show that difﬁculties in Aristotle's conclusions result from more basic difﬁculties in
his method. He speaks

CHAPTER 4 § 49

93

as though commonsense distinctions actually support his own candidates for substance. But his appeal to common
sense and pure dialectic does not succeed. Even if his candidates for substance (artifacts and natural organisms) are
also recognized by common sense, it does not follow that commonsense criteria for substance actually support these
candidates; and in fact the criteria seem to support non-Aristotelian candidates at least as well. This is exactly the
difﬁculty that we noticed in Aristotle's treatment of subjects in the Categories.
On these points dialectic seems to offer less deﬁnite answers than Aristotle wants. In any case, even if its answers were
deﬁnite enough, they would support claims about endoxic principles summarizing common sense, but not about
objective principles. The questions raised by dialectical arguments for ﬁrst principles are not answered by the
arguments we have examined so far.

5 The Formal Cause
50. Nature and Cause
In Physics ii Aristotle reopens the questions about matter, form, and substance that he discussed in Book i. He now
discusses them with reference to his views about causation. I want to explain why his argument fails to avoid the
limitations of pure dialectic, but also shows how these limitations might be avoided.
So far Aristotle has argued that change requires a subject and the contraries; and that substantial change requires
matter as the subject, and form as one of the contraries. He has found it to be unclear whether matter or form is
substance. In ii 1 he starts again with a subset of changes, those that have an internal origin in a natural organism; and
he wants to know what the origin is. The answer is relevant to the questions left over from Book i, in ways that will be
clear later.
Things have natures in so far as they have an internal origin of change and stability, and in this way they differ from
artifacts such as beds or tables (192b13–27). Aristotle explains ‘origin of change’ only in ii 3, when he introduces the
doctrine of the four causes. These correspond to the four ways we can state a cause or explanation of something, and
hence can answer the question ‘Why?’ (194b17–23). One of these, commonly called the ‘efﬁcient cause’, is described in
terms very similar to those applied to nature, in ii 1; it is ‘that from which 〈there is〉 the ﬁrst origin of change or rest’
(194b29–30; cf. 195a22–3), or ‘that from which the change is’ (195a8), or simply ‘the origin of change’ (195a11). The
examples of this cause seem to ﬁt our conception of causes fairly easily; the adviser is the cause of an action, the father
of the child, ‘and in general the producer of the thing produced, and the initiator of change of the thing changed’
(194b29–32).
The account of the four causes raises a difﬁculty for Aristotle's initial claims about form, matter, and nature. For he
seems to imply both that form and matter are efﬁcient causes, since they are origins of change, and that they are not,
since they are formal and material causes, not efﬁcient causes.1 To resolve this apparent inconsistency we need to
examine the four causes more carefully; and in examining them we will understand better the dialectical foundation of
Aristotle's doctrine. Surprisingly, his exposition of the doctrine of the four causes does not

CHAPTER 5 § 51

95

fully explain his use of the doctrine to defend his claim about form and matter; and this is because his exposition stays
too close to the common beliefs that it ought to explain.

51. The Four Causes
Since different answers to the question ‘Why?’ pick out the four causes, we might think Aristotle intends the four to be
coordinate and mutually irreducible answers to this question. But closer study raises doubts. The different whyquestions ask for explanations of different types of things. We may want the cause of a substance (e.g. a statue, 194b25,
195a5–6) or a state of a substance (e.g. health, 195a9, 30) or of an event (e.g. the sinking of the ship, 195a14).2 One of
the four causes may be more suitable for answering the question about substances, another for events, and so on; in
that case they will really answer different questions. We do not even seem to be asking the same kind of question about
these different things. For sometimes we seem to be asking why something comes to be, sometimes why it exists,
sometimes why it is as it is. The types of things we mention in our answers are equally diverse. Sometimes the causes
are substances (e.g. the doctor, 195a30), sometimes states of substances (e.g. the statue-maker's craft, 195a6),
sometimes events (e.g. slimming, 194b36; the pilot's absence, 195a12–14).3
The diversity of questions and answers is not surprising; Aristotle takes them from ordinary questions and
explanations, which range easily over events and substances.4 The doctrine of the four causes is dialectical, in so far as
it rests on common beliefs and ordinary questions about causes and explanations. But it reﬂects the diversity of these
questions to a degree that obscures the facts they describe. For some of the questions seem to be reducible to, or
abbreviations of, others. If we ask for the cause of the statue, we probably want the cause of its coming into being; and
if we say the doctor is the cause of my health, we can say more exactly that her practising her medical science is the
cause of my recovering my health. Aristotle himself says that the ‘most exact’ cause is the actual, not merely potential,
cause, e.g. the builder exercising his building craft (195b21–8).5
If a cause of one type (e.g. a substance) is reducible to a cause of another type (e.g. an event), it is worth considering
whether some of the four causes may not be reducible to others. We may say that the matter and the form are causes
of the statue; but ‘the statue’ seems to be an inexact description of what is to be explained. A more exact description
asks for the explanation of the statue's being made, or of its being as it is,

96

CHAPTER 5 § 51

or of its remaining in existence. Once we have speciﬁed the effect more fully, we also want a fuller speciﬁcation of the
cause. Simply citing the form or the matter does not seem to provide the proper explanation; ‘the form is the cause of
the statue’ seems a mere abbreviation. The cause of the fully speciﬁed effect is properly and fully described as ‘the
sculptor exercising her craft’ or ‘the customer giving her order’. But now we have stated the efﬁcient cause and not
simply the form or the matter.
The appearance of four causes rather than one seems to result from incomplete speciﬁcation of the causes and the
effects. If nothing more can be said for Aristotle's doctrine of four causes, then it does not describe four objectively
different causes, but only four ways to describe the cause; and three of these ways are mere abbreviations of the
fourth way.
But if Aristotle cannot defend his claim as it stands, that the formal and material causes are different types of causes
from the efﬁcient cause, he can still reasonably argue that they are different types of efﬁcient cause, differing from each
other, though not from all types of efﬁcient cause. The ‘most exact’ and fully speciﬁed cause of the events we have
mentioned is apparently the efﬁcient cause; but different sorts of efﬁcient cause cause different events. The cause of
the bed's being burnt is the action of the ﬁre on the matter of the bed; the bed's form is not mentioned in the
explanation. But the cause of the bed's being made is the craftsman's exercising his craft to make a bed; both the form
and the goal are referred to in the explanation. To mention the formal, material, ﬁnal, and efﬁcient causes of the statue
is not really to maintain four distinct causes of the same thing. When the effect is speciﬁed more clearly, reference to
the ﬁrst three causes turns out to be attribution of formal, ﬁnal, or material properties to the efﬁcient cause.
If this is right, then Aristotle's initial suggestion that form and matter are internal origins of change, and therefore
efﬁcient causes, is more nearly correct than his claim that formal and material causes are not efﬁcient causes. He would
be well advised to claim that formal and material causes are really efﬁcient causes that have, respectively, formal and
material properties as their essential constituents. In claiming that form and matter are nature, therefore, he will claim
that the internal efﬁcient causes of an organism's characteristics have formal or material properties as essential
constituents.
This is a restatement, rather than a statement, of Aristotle's doctrine. His actual doctrine of the four causes is too
purely dialectical, and stays too close to common beliefs, to make clear the centrality of the efﬁcient cause; and his
failure to make this clear seriously affects some of the argument in Book ii. Still, the remarks about the actual cause and
about the most exact cause show that he is committed to the centrality of the

CHAPTER 5 § 52

97

efﬁcient cause; and this centrality makes his claim about form and matter more reasonable than it would otherwise be.
It is therefore worth exploring the consequences of Aristotle's restated position for his other doctrines.

52. Causes and First Principles
Aristotle's views on causation and explanation affect still wider issues about the extent of his realism about ﬁrst
principles. For he claims that ﬁrst principles are naturally, not conventionally, prior to other things, and that they are
prior because they are explanatory and state the causes. (Indeed, they are the causes, since he uses ‘ﬁrst principle’ for
non-propositional principles as well as for the propositional principles that describe them.)6 But the claim about
explanation may seem to conﬂict with the realist claim. How, we might ask, does one thing explain another unless it
explains to us, relatively to what we already know, to the questions we ask, and to the different theories we apply? And
may not different things turn out to be explanatory within different theories? Though Aristotle might appear to
demand correspondence between true statements of ﬁrst principles and independently prior things, the reference to
explanation suggests that the structure and context of theories will determine what is prior by nature.
Aristotle need not admit any conﬂict in his views, if he can plausibly deny that reference to explanation introduces a
subjective or pragmatic notion of explanation that makes natural priority depend on our questions and theories. He
can distinguish explanation ‘for us’ from natural or unqualiﬁed explanation. In our ignorance we may ask the wrong
questions and be satisﬁed with the wrong answers and dissatisﬁed with the right ones. If President McKinley was shot
on a Tuesday and President Kennedy on a Wednesday, we may ask why Kennedy was shot on the day of the week after
the day on which McKinley was shot. If our otherwise reasonable explanation of each shooting says nothing about the
importance of the day of the week, we may be foolish enough to be dissatisﬁed. Only a better understanding of how
things are will show us which explanatory accounts ought to satisfy us. These are the accounts that provide the genuine
explanations. A reference to explanation does not reintroduce a subjective element into Aristotle's account of ﬁrst
principles; on the contrary, the notion of explanation itself needs to be understood through Aristotle's distinctions.
The conception of explanation assumed by the doctrine of the four causes might initially seem too pragmatic to be an
account of objective principles. For the kind of answer we get seems to be determined by the

98

CHAPTER 5 § 52

way we put our question; ‘What is the cause of the statue?’ may be answered by reference to the formal or material
cause, whereas ‘Why did the statue come into being?’ requires us to cite the efﬁcient cause. But this appearance of
pragmatic relativity to questions does not really express Aristotle's doctrine. The actual causes and most exact causes
are not relative to particular questions; the different questions we ask are different ways, more or less fully speciﬁed, of
looking for the most exact causes. When we see this, we also see the centrality of the efﬁcient cause more clearly than
Aristotle sees it in expounding his own doctrine. Though his explicit account does not make this clear, he implicitly
assumes that in looking for causes, we are looking for objective principles and explanations.
But if we allow Aristotle a conception of explanation that is not purely pragmatic and subjective, we can raise a further
question for him. Different types of explanations may correspond to different theories; physics, psychology,
economics, and history may all explain the same events, and each theory recognizes some things as naturally prior to
others. If natural priority is not to be relative to a particular theory, then apparently the theories must themselves be
ordered, so that we must regard the things recognized by one theory as prior to those recognized by another. We may
think that unless some theories and the entities they recognize are prior to others, we are forced back to a pragmatic
conception of explanation.
Though Aristotle does not discuss the questions about priority between different theories, he recognizes four causes,
four different types of explanations. Though he does not relate his belief in four causes to his views on ﬁrst principles,
the relation should surely be important. Even if the material, formal, and ﬁnal causes are really types of efﬁcient cause,
not non-efﬁcient causes, Aristotle still claims that they specify irreducibly different explanations. If he is right, there
should be different types of things that are naturally prior to other things without being prior or posterior to each
other; and if Aristotle believes this, he will have to show that different theories are true, recognizing different entities,
but not allowing us to say that one theory is prior to another.
The discussion of causes in Physics ii does not state a completely clear or satisfactory view on these issues. The loose
and inexplicit character of ordinary questions and judgments about causation infects Aristotle's doctrine; and his claims
about form and matter as causes are not all consistent. Book ii, no less than Book i, reﬂects the limitations of dialectic.
But if we can see how to modify Aristotle's claims so as to make a consistent and defensible doctrine of causes, we
might also be able to defend some modiﬁed version of his claims about the material and the formal cause; they might
be part of an account of ﬁrst principles satisfying the constraints of Aristotle's metaphysical realism.

CHAPTER 5 § 53

99

53. Form and Matter as Causes
In Physics ii 1 Aristotle defends his claim, gradually anticipated in Book i, that form is nature and substance. His use of
the doctrine of the four causes allows him to offer new arguments, but it also raises new difﬁculties for his claims.
He presents an argument, ascribed to Antiphon, to show that matter is the nature of things. He endorses the implied
conception of nature, and accepts, with important reservations, the conclusion of the argument. Matter is
. . . the ﬁrst thing present in each thing, being in itself unordered—e.g., the wood is the nature of a bed and the
bronze of a statue. (193a10–12)
. . . the ﬁrst matter that is subject for each thing that has in itself an origin of change and variation. (193a29–30)
Antiphon argues that if you buried a bed and the rotted mass acquired the capacity to put out a shoot, what would
grow from it would not be a bed, but wood (193a13–14); he infers that being a bed is simply a coincident of the
subject, a temporary arrangement of the wood, and that the nature and substance is the wood, or whatever further
matter underlies the wood in the way the wood underlies a bed (193a14–21).
Antiphon argues that the matter is the internal origin of change, and therefore the nature, by showing that the changes
happening to the bed are explained by its being wood, not by its having been a bed. He might equally have remarked
that if we set it alight or take an axe to it, it will burn or break in so far as it is wood, not in so far as it is a bed. Aristotle
said this himself about artifacts (192b16–32); and Antiphon adds that all the changes in the bed happen to it simply as
wood. No further subject needs to be assumed, in so far as these changes can be understood by reference to facts
about the wood.
Antiphon's argument shows the role of the material cause in relation to the efﬁcient cause. The matter of the bed is not
the ‘actual’ and ‘most exact’ efﬁcient cause of what happens to the wood; to ﬁnd that we need to mention some event
that is a change in the wood. Still, if we say that a change happens to it because it is wood, we claim that the properties
of the wood explain why the change happens as it does. If we mention the matter, we do not necessarily mention the
event that is the actual and most exact efﬁcient cause of the change, but we mention an important property of that
event. The nature of an organism explains something about the efﬁcient-causal processes it undergoes, and in so far as
matter does this, it is the nature of the organism.
Aristotle's arguments to show that form is nature reﬂect his usual dialectical strategy and expose its weakness
(193a31–b18).7 He appeals to ways we speak of form, when we ascribe a nature to something, and

100

CHAPTER 5 § 54

when we mention the origin and conclusion of its coming to be. We imply that an organism has not reached its nature
until it has acquired its form; and so we commit ourselves, given Aristotle's account of nature, to further claims about
the causal relevance of form as an internal origin of change. But the fact that common beliefs and common ways of
speaking commit us to these claims does not show that the claims are true; and Antiphon challenges their truth, not
the fact of our commitment to them.
In pointing out that common beliefs, including the conception of nature as internal origin, commit us to claims about
causal relevance, Aristotle answers Antiphon in the sense in which he answers the Eleatics in Book i; he shows that
some assumptions accepted by common sense require us to disagree with the critic. But this answer does not meet
Antiphon's further claim that the assumptions of common sense are false or unjustiﬁed. To show that we have good
reason to believe form is nature Aristotle needs to answer Antiphon's further claim; and the purely dialectical
arguments offered in ii 1 do not even try to answer it.

54. Further Difculties About Form
It is difﬁcult for Aristotle to show that form is a cause, partly because he has not found quite the right conception of
form. In Book i he introduces form as shape; and it might seem all right to say that a statue is what it is by having the
physical shape it acquires when it is made from the bronze.8 But even in this case the identiﬁcation of shape with form
will lead to odd results. A statue could change its shape without ceasing to be the particular statue of Pericles that it is;
and a rock that happened to be worn by weather to the very same shape would still not be a statue of Pericles. If the
shape is the form, then the form is not essential to the statue, since the statue can survive with a different shape; if so,
Aristotle ought not to treat form as the essence of an artifact or organism (cf. PA 640a34, 641a25). If the form of the
statue is essential to it, then other features besides shape must constitute the form, and the reference to shape can at
most give us a very rough ﬁrst conception of form.
If we turn from artifacts to organisms, it is even clearer that form cannot be just the same as shape. For the same
organism can change its shape many times in its life; if Aristotle thinks loss of the form is destruction of the organism,
he cannot allow it to change its form as often as it changes its shape. The form must be the right sort of thing to
persist throughout the organism's life and to be the internal origin of change.9

CHAPTER 5 § 54

101

A further difﬁculty in Aristotle's conception of form creates difﬁculties in his conception of substance. In identifying
form with nature he identiﬁes it with essence (193a30–1, 193b1–2). We expect this claim to support the claim that
form is substance. But the support is dubious. It is easy to argue that if form is the nature and essence of x, it is the
substance of x; but the substance of x seems to be a second, not a ﬁrst, substance. As Aristotle has described it so far,
the nature of one tree will be the same as the nature of another. If form is a universal, it is a second substance. If form
is only second substance, then apparently bits of matter are the only ﬁrst substances, because they will be the only
subjects.10
But the view that form is only a second, not a ﬁrst, substance is not clearly coherent; for a second substance must
correspond to the essence of some ﬁrst substance, and it is not clear what ﬁrst substances have form as their essence.
The form of a statue is not essential to a bit of bronze. It is certainly essential to a statue; but if a statue is a mere
compound analogous to a musician, the form of statue is no more a second substance than the form of musician is.
Similarly, the form of a tree cannot be the second substance of anything, if a particular tree is simply a piece of wood
with some coincidental properties. Once again Antiphon's argument seems to intensify the objections that Aristotle
himself raised in Book i against his ordinary candidates for substance; and his arguments to show that form is nature
do not seem to disarm the objections. He does not show why we must believe that there are essentially formal ﬁrst
substances.
For these reasons the claims about form in ii 1 show that Aristotle's conception of it is in some disorder. Antiphon's
claims about matter imply that if form is nature, it must have the appropriate causal role. Aristotle's explicit dialectical
arguments do not show that form has this role; he does not even explicitly recognize that he ought to show this. Nor
does he show how the conception of form as nature ﬁts the claims about substance and subject in Book i.
Most of these questions are left unsettled in Book ii. Nonetheless Aristotle sometimes suggests some of the argument
he needs. In ii 2 he alludes to the causal role of the form. In appealing to the analogy of craft and nature he says that a
supervisory craft must know the form that is the goal of production by a subordinate craft (194b2–7). Since the goal
introduces the ﬁnal cause, Aristotle's remark suggests how the form of an artifact is causally relevant. To justify the
analogy with crafts he must show that the form of natural organisms is also a ﬁnal cause and therefore an internal
origin of change, as a nature should be.
Aristotle does not say that his claims about form must be defended by an argument for ﬁnal causation in nature. The
claims rest on purely

102

CHAPTER 5 § 55

dialectical arguments, showing how belief in form as nature is entrenched in common beliefs; he does not say that
entrenched beliefs are false unless ﬁnal causation can be defended. None the less he argues for ﬁnal causation in
nature; and since these arguments are even more important for his claims about form and matter than he explicitly
recognizes, we should examine them.

55. Disputes About Teleology
Aristotle normally assumes the truth of teleological explanations as conﬁdently as he assumes the truth of other
common beliefs. He suggests that we should begin with the appearances, and then look for the causes (PA 639b8–10,
640a13–15). But among the appearances, the things we ‘see’, are the four causes among which the ﬁnal cause ‘appears’
primary (639b12–16). The claim that the goal is prior to the process in craft and nature, and that the process is for the
sake of the goal, is included among the appearances from which we set out to construct our theory (640a10–19). Once
this claim is granted, it is used against Empedocles' account of reproduction (640a19–b4; cf. Phys. 193b8–12).
The status of Aristotle's belief in teleology suggests some constraints on interpretation. He evidently thinks it is an
appearance that should guide further inquiry, not a conclusion of detailed empirical study, resulting from the
examination and elimination of rival explanations. The teleological assumption should not, then, rely on the sort of
detailed empirical evidence that requires us to go beyond widely accessible appearances. Certainly Aristotle might be
wrong about the proper evidential basis for a belief in teleology; but if we are to see what he thinks its evidential basis
is, we should begin from the fact that the thinks it counts as itself an appearance, rather than a conclusion from
appearances.
He is not justiﬁed, however, in taking ﬁnal causation for granted without showing why it is preferable to other views.
In Physics ii 8 he recognizes what he fails to recognize in ii 1 and in PA i, that the belief in teleology deserves some
defence against rival views. He may not think teleology needs this defence; he may think it is really quite obvious and
simply does not appear obvious to those who are misled by the Presocratics. But at least he suggests the type of
argument he would need if he thought, correctly, that an argument was needed.
He faces opponents who claim that (1) everything in nature happens of necessity, according to deterministic nonteleological causal laws referring to purely material properties of natural organisms; (2) a complete efﬁcient-causal
explanation of natural processes can be given

CHAPTER 5 § 55

103

in such terms; and so (3) there are no ﬁnal causes in nature (198b10–27). Aristotle clearly rejects the third claim; and if
he thinks ﬁnal causation has implications for efﬁcient causation, he should also reject the second.
His attitude to the ﬁrst claim is less clear. For now it is enough to notice that if our previous account of the four causes
is right, rejection of the second and third claims does not require rejection of the ﬁrst. Even if every natural event has a
material cause whose material properties explain the material properties of the effect, some of these events might still
have ﬁnal causes whose formal properties explain the formal properties of the effect. First we should see if Aristotle
has an argument for the positive claim about ﬁnal causation, and then see what it implies about the extent of material
causation.
At once Aristotle sees a serious difﬁculty for his view. He asks why we should not say that apparently teleological
processes have their results only coincidentally. If some process or condition is good for an animal, in promoting its
survival and ﬂourishing, we might infer that its function in achieving that good result explains why it happens. Aristotle
rejects the inference; the rain does not fall to make the crops grow, even though this is a reliable result of it, any more
than it falls to destroy the crops on the threshing-ﬂoor, even though this is sometimes the result (198b16–23).11
Once we reject the inference from conjunction to explanation, we may wonder if we are equally wrong in believing that
any natural processes have ﬁnal causes. Empedocles argues that the beneﬁcial results of having teeth are merely
coincidental, and have nothing to do with why creatures have the teeth they have; creatures have useful teeth only
because the creatures without them have died.
Why not suppose, then, that the same is true of the parts of organisms in nature? It will be from necessity, e.g., that
the front teeth come up sharp and suitable for biting, and the back ones broad and useful for chewing food—since
this result was coincidental, not what they came about for. And the same will be true of all the other parts that seem
to be for something. On this view, then, whenever all the parts came about coincidentally as though for something,
these animals survived, since their chance constitution made them suitable for survival. Other animals, however,
were differently constituted, and so were destroyed—indeed they are still being destroyed—as Empedocles says of
the man-headed calves. (198b23–32)
Aristotle seems to admit clearly that regular beneﬁt is insufﬁcient for teleology.

104

CHAPTER 5 § 56

56. The Difference Between Final Causation and Coincidence
Before we consider how Aristotle replies to the Empedoclean argument, we should pause at a prior question. What
does he take to be necessary and sufﬁcient for real teleology, as opposed to regular but coincidental beneﬁt? We must
interrupt discussion of ii 8 and return to the discussion of luck (tuchê) and chance (automaton) earlier in book ii; for here
he explains the standards that a genuine teleological explanation must meet.
The lucky event involves X, who is collecting subscriptions for a club, and Y, who owes X a subscription. X happens
by luck to be in the market-place when Y is there, and so X collects the subscription from Y (196b33–6).12 The lucky
event is the sort of thing X would have decided to do; if he had known Y would be in the market then, X would have
come to meet him and collect the money (196b33–4). Moreover, it is caused by a decision, hence ‘done from thought’
(196b22).13 X's decision to sell his goods causes him to be in the market at 9 a.m.; 9 a.m. is the time when Y is in the
market; hence X's decision to sell his goods causes him to be in the market when Y is, and hence causes X to meet Y
(196a1–11).
Aristotle does not deny this account of the cause, but wants to show that none the less it is a matter of luck. He appeals
to the distinction between intrinsic and coincidental causation. We can truly say that the builder, or the pale thing, or
the musical thing, caused the house, if the builder is both pale and musical (196b24–9); but only ‘the builder’ describes
what intrinsically causes the house. The pale, musical builder builds the house because he is a builder, not because he is
pale or musical.
This general conception of coincidental causation explains how lucky events are caused. A lucky event, as such, is the
coincidental result of thought, and therefore is only coincidentally for the sake of some end, which is different from the
result that is actually reached (196b20–1, 29–30). For X came into the market with quite a different purpose
(196b34–6).14 The cause of X's being in the market when Y is there is X's decision to sell his goods; but this is only the
coincidental cause. X's decision to sell his goods explains his being in the market at 9 a.m., and hence is the intrinsic
cause of that property of the event; but it does not explain his being there when Y was there, since this was no part of
X's decision. What explains X's being there when Y is there is the fact that the time when X has arrived is the time
when Y has arrived. Though X would have planned this had he known, he did not plan it. The event is a matter of
luck, because the contribution of the event to X's debt-collecting

CHAPTER 5 § 57

105

plans is not linked to X's plans by the right causal connexion; he did not decide on the event because he thought it
would fulﬁl these plans.15
Aristotle's discussion of lucky and random events shows that the difference between an event with a genuine ﬁnal
cause and an event without it is a difference in efﬁcient causation. When there is no ﬁnal cause, the beneﬁcial result
secured does not explain anything about the efﬁcient causation of the event.16 Aristotle's argument conﬁrms our
previous claim, that if something is the ﬁnal cause of an event it must be relevant to the efﬁcient causation of the event.
Aristotle's doctrine of the causes implies that material, formal, and ﬁnal causation are really types of efﬁcient causation;
the most exact and actual cause will be the efﬁcient cause of which the formal or material properties are essential
constituents. The discussion of luck shows that he accepts the centrality of the efﬁcient cause, even though he does not
state it in his account of the four causes; for the difference between matters of luck and properties of an event that
have genuine ﬁnal causes turns on the absence or presence of the right sort of efﬁcient causation. If ﬁnal causation
were not a type of efﬁcient causation, this condition would not be reasonable; but if the condition is reasonable, and
expresses the right view of ﬁnal causation, it must also be a reasonable condition for natural teleology.

57. The Arguments for Teleology
To answer Empedocles' attempts to explain apparent natural teleology as mere coincidence, Aristotle ought to show
that the beneﬁts in natural processes really explain the processes. His actual answer, however, is rather curt and
obscure.
〈Empedocles'〉 argument, then, and others like it, might puzzle someone. In fact, however, it is impossible for
things to be like this. For these 〈teeth and other useful parts〉, and all natural things, come to be as they do either
always or usually, whereas no result of luck or chance does. (For we do not regard frequent winter rain or a summer
heatwave, but only summer rain or a winter heatwave, as a result of luck or coincidence.) If, then, these
〈teeth etc.〉 seem to be either coincidental results or for something, and they cannot be coincidental or chance
results, it follows that they are for something. Now surely all such things are natural, as even those making these
claims 〈about necessity〉 would agree. We ﬁnd, then, that things are for something when they come into being
and remain in being naturally. (198b32–199a8)17
The most obscure and important claim says that some natural processes happen ‘always or usually’. It is important to
know what Aristotle

106

CHAPTER 5 § 57

means by this claim; what grounds he has for believing it; and what it contributes to the argument for natural teleology.
If ‘always or usually’ just implies uniformity, then surely Aristotle is unjustiﬁed in assuming ﬁnal causation.18 Final
causation requires the right sort of efﬁcient causation, not mere uniformity. If surviving animals uniformly or
frequently have beneﬁcial teeth, it does not follow that the beneﬁt of the teeth has anything to do with their efﬁcient
causation. Empedocles accounts for the uniformity by saying that some animals were coincidentally born with
beneﬁcial teeth, and the animals without them died; this account avoids all ﬁnal causation. If Aristotle simply takes
uniformity to be sufﬁcient for teleology, he entirely misses the point of Empedocles' argument; such obtuseness is
surprising when Aristotle has himself shown how Empedocles can account for uniformity, and has shown us in the
account of luck and the random that some appropriate causal connexion is needed for ﬁnal causation.
Aristotle might be more prone to obtuseness here if he did not quite see that his account of luck made uniformity
insufﬁcient for ﬁnal causation. For in his discussion of luck he seems to think that what happens always (necessarily) or
usually cannot be a matter of luck (196b36–197a5; cf. 199b24–5). Perhaps, then, he means that if X uniformly or
frequently meets Y in the market, this cannot be a matter of luck. If this is what he means, then here also he
illegitimately infers ﬁnal causation from uniformity.
Probably, however, he avoids this illegitimate inference. He says that if X met Y always or usually as a result of hanging
around the market to meet Y, then his meeting Y would not, on these occasions, be a matter of luck.19 Aristotle wants
to say that X's decision to meet Y explains his meeting Y even if it is only usually followed by meeting Y. In saying this
he does not imply that mere uniformity or frequency of X's being in the market when Y is shows that the meeting is
non-coincidental; he implies only that he does not think a cause must be sufﬁcient for its effect. X's decision to meet Y
is only usually followed by meeting Y, because other conditions besides the decision are needed for the meeting, and
these may not always obtain. None the less the salient causal inﬂuence we want to pick out is the relevant mental state
of X; and we correctly believe his decision has this salient inﬂuence.20
If he applies the same conception of ‘always or usually’ to the argument against Empedocles, Aristotle does not
confuse uniformity with causal connexion, and does not move without defence from one to the other. Rather, the
‘always or usually’ claim itself means that there is an invariable or usual causal connexion between the beneﬁt secured
by the natural process and the process itself, explaining why the process comes about.21 In speaking of a usual
connexion Aristotle already means

CHAPTER 5 § 57

107

that the beneﬁcial result has the right sort of explanatory relevance to the process; and then he is entitled to infer that
the process happens for the sake of the result.
Now, however, Aristotle seems to beg the question. His claim about the always-or-usual connexion is not a purely
statistical claim about uniformity that an opponent must already accept. It is already a causal claim, from which the
step to teleology is very short. But if it is a causal claim, it is not clear why an opponent must accept it. Aristotle seems
simply to claim without defence the sort of causal relevance he needs. He is certainly at fault for failing to defend his
claim; but the fault is remediable, if we can see some defence.
Aristotle and Empedocles disagree about why beneﬁcial teeth tend to arise, as a present and stable tendency in nature.
Empedocles claims that in every single generation it is a matter of chance that they arise; the beneﬁt of teeth is not
causally relevant for explaining why the dog born today has beneﬁcial teeth. On Empedocles' view, many animals are
born with beneﬁcial teeth, and many are born with useless teeth; no ﬁnal cause explains the condition of the teeth in
either case, but the animals with bad teeth die and those with good teeth survive. The character of the teeth helps to
explain why some die and others survive, but not why they have good or bad teeth.
Aristotle replies that things do not happen as they would if Empedocles were right. We see that animals needing teeth
are uniformly or frequently born with beneﬁcial teeth or acquire them in the process of growth; we do not see large
numbers of toothless or blunt-toothed creatures perish for the want of good teeth. Aristotle assumes that a reasonable
explanation of this pattern involves reference to the beneﬁt of teeth; and indeed Empedocles' own account shows why
this is a reasonable explanation.
To show why it is not a matter of coincidence that animals have beneﬁcial teeth, we may appeal to the fact that
members of the previous generation with bad teeth have perished, and hence presumably have been unable to
reproduce in large numbers. While Empedocles agrees that bad teeth explain perishing (198b29–32), he does not see
that his admission undermines his claim that the beneﬁcial teeth in later generations are a coincidence. In later
generations they have a ﬁnal cause, since their beneﬁt explains their presence. If Empedocles had taken this further
step he fails to take, he would have applied his claims about perishing to reproduction; and then he would have had to
admit ﬁnal causation.22

108

CHAPTER 5 § 58

58. The Basis of the Argument for Teleology
Aristotle suggests an appropriately ad hominem argument against Empedocles. He does not himself accept
Empedocles' view of the non-teleological origins of beneﬁcial teeth. But for present purposes, he does not challenge it;
he does not say that the past could never have been as Empedocles says it was. In failing to challenge Empedocles'
version of natural history, he suggests that this version itself supports the view that the uniform or frequent occurrence
of beneﬁcial teeth has a ﬁnal cause. He does not explain why Empedocles must admit the ﬁnal cause; but the
description of Empedocles' view suggests the explanation that Aristotle omits.
Elsewhere Aristotle discusses Empedocles' claim that plants grow upwards and downwards because ﬁre tends to rise
and earth tends to sink (DA 415b28–416a2). In Aristotle's view, we also need to know what prevents the earth and ﬁre
from being pulled apart when they move in these contrary directions (416a6–9). Similarly, those who think the nature
of ﬁre is, without qualiﬁcation or addition, the cause of growth and nutrition must explain why the growth does not go
on indeﬁnitely, but only to a certain limit (416a9–18). Reference to the formal, and hence to the ﬁnal, cause explains
why the material and efﬁcient causes cited by Empedocles operate as they do. Aristotle implies that the beneﬁt of
growth and nutrition explains why they happen as they do, and why the efﬁcient-causal processes vary as they do
(416a7–9, 15–18).23
This passage suggests more clearly than Physics ii 8 does why we should appeal to a ﬁnal cause. If we appeal to it we can
explain a striking regularity (the tendency of organisms to hold together and grow in certain ways) that we cannot
explain without appeal to it. Even if we can explain everything about the addition and subtraction of the matter of each
individual body, we will not have explained this regularity about some types of material body. A similar point applies to
Empedocles' account in Physics ii 8; Empedocles cannot explain, without reference to the beneﬁt of teeth, why later
generations mostly have the sort of teeth they have. Aristotle correctly implies that we need not accept his own belief in
the ﬁxity of species and in the teleological structure of the universe, in order to recognize ﬁnal causes among the
appearances. Even the false Empedoclean explanation of the appearances does not undermine ﬁnal causation.24
The argument stays too close to pure dialectic to show its theoretical commitments clearly, and so it displays a fault that
we have previously noticed in the ﬁrst two books of the Physics. Aristotle assumes the truth of the common belief in
ﬁnal causes, and defends it by citing the sorts of

CHAPTER 5 § 59

109

examples in which common sense sees ﬁnal causes. He does not, however, openly recognize the claims about efﬁcient
causation that follow from common beliefs but are not certiﬁed by them. Common sense does not assume the truth of
any one particular efﬁcient-causal account of a given natural process; but it requires some account involving formal
and teleological properties to be true, and hence is not compatible with all logically possible empirical accounts.25
Aristotle sees that the belief in teleology is fairly ﬂexible about its empirical basis; for he defends it without challenging
Empedocles' account of the empirical basis. To some extent he also sees that belief in ﬁnal causation is inﬂexible in
assuming the sort of efﬁcient-causal connexion that excludes mere coincidence; for he recognizes this condition in
distinguishing luck and chance from ﬁnal causation, and he alludes to it in insisting on an always-or-usual connexion
that is not purely statistical. Still, he neither clearly identiﬁes nor clearly defends the efﬁcient-causal component of the
common belief in natural teleology.
Aristotle's failure is understandable, both because of his conception of dialectical argument and because of his account
of the causes, a particular product of his dialectical method. The account of the causes does not display the central
place of the efﬁcient cause, and so does not make clear the implications of a claim about ﬁnal causation; hence these
implications are not as prominent as they should be in the argument for teleology. In both cases Aristotle's approach is
dialectical. He wants to articulate the appearances and common beliefs, and to remove objections and puzzles, by
referring to other beliefs and recognized examples. Dialectical method does not try to do any more; but if it does no
more, it can offer only a limited ‘road towards ﬁrst principles’.
Aristotle does not examine the common beliefs far enough to expose the causal assumptions they rest on, and the
further claims that he would have to defend if he wanted to show that the endoxic principles underlying common
beliefs are also objective principles. Nothing in Physics i–ii suggests that he sets himself this particular task; to the extent
that he does not try such a defence of common beliefs, he offers no explicit answer to important questions about his
principles. Doubts about natural teleology do not seem to be doubts about something self-evident; and if Aristotle
thinks some objective principles justify the belief in natural teleology, he can fairly be asked for a further defence.26

59. Teleology and Necessity
Aristotle clariﬁes to some extent the causal commitments of commonsense teleological assumptions, in his discussion
of conditional and

110

CHAPTER 5 § 59

unconditional necessity. He rejects the view that only non-teleological explanations are appropriate; but we still need to
see if he rejects the view that every natural event conforms to deterministic non-teleological causal laws referring to
purely material properties of natural organisms.
Belief in this non-teleological necessity threatens belief in teleology, if we take teleological claims about an event to be
superseded by a non-teleological causal explanation of it. If we do not know much about a thermostat, we may get a
rough idea by supposing it has a little man in it who knows when it reaches 68 degrees and then turns it off. But when
we really understand it, we see that these intentional notions are false; if we keep on using them it is only because they
are convenient and familiar, as we speak of the sun rising even though we know it does not rise. On this view, once we
ﬁnd a non-teleological explanation for an event that we explained teleologically, the teleological explanation becomes
superﬂuous; necessity undermines teleology.27
Aristotle might try any of three possible answers to this objection:
1. Teleological claims do not conﬂict with non-teleological explanations, because they imply nothing about
efﬁcient-causal explanations at all. If the relevant cases display, uniformly or frequently, the order that we see in
artifacts and natural organisms, our teleological claim is justiﬁed, no matter what the efﬁcient-causal explanation
may be.28
2. Teleological claims are causal, and they are ineliminable because they explain events that have no nonteleological explanation.29
3. Teleological claims are causal, and are ineliminable because they refer to explanatory properties of events that
may also have non-teleological explanations.30
The ﬁrst answer is in some ways easiest for Aristotle if he relies on pure dialectic; it appeals to the sorts of facts that
might reasonably appear to be evident to common sense. But such a defence undermines the right of teleological
claims to supply ﬁnal causes, on Aristotle's own conception of ﬁnal causes. His account of luck and chance shows that
true teleological claims require the truth of some efﬁcient-causal claims. To distinguish ﬁnal causation from
coincidence Aristotle must apparently go beyond what pure dialectic can give him, and must make causal claims that
rule out the ﬁrst answer to the necessitarian challenge.
The second answer commits teleological judgments to a very strong causal claim about the absence of non-teleological
explanations. Aristotle can hardly claim to know that this claim is true, much less that common sense knows it is true.
If he accepts this claim, it is hard to see how he could even suggest that the truth of teleology is one of the
appearances; far from being an appearance, it would require knowledge of the guaranteed failure of numerous
conceivable attempts to ﬁnd non-teleological causal explanations.

CHAPTER 5 § 59

111

Moreover, it is hard to see how the second answer is consistent with the efﬁcient-causal claims implied by a teleological
claim. For a claim about a ﬁnal cause invites us to look for a certain sort of efﬁcient cause. If, for instance, we say that
an axe is made to chop wood, we justify our claim by showing that it is in fact made by an efﬁcient-causal process to
which the chopping capacity of an axe is relevant; reference to the intentions of a designer would show the sort of
relevance we want. But this efﬁcient-causal explanation is no longer a teleological explanation; if we ﬁnd it, and if
Aristotle accepts the second answer, we will have eliminated any reason for accepting the ﬁnal cause.31 On this view,
claims about ﬁnal causation, understood in Aristotle's way, will be peculiarly self-destructive, undermined by their own
success.
If we are right about the relation between teleological explanation and the search for non-teleological efﬁcient causes,
then Aristotle's view ought to be the exact reverse—that if a teleological explanation is true, some sort of nonteleological explanation is also true, and our knowledge of its truth is part of our grounds for claiming to know the
truth of the teleological explanation. Unless he believes that the truth of a non-teleological causal explanation implies
the falsity of a teleological account of the same event, Aristotle has no good reason to accept the second answer; and
the efﬁcient-causal implications of teleology give him very good reason to reject it. The third answer is the most
reasonable, if he can show that the non-teleological explanation does not allow us to eliminate the teleological
explanation.
Aristotle's discussion in Physics ii 9 does not make his view clear. He recognizes two kinds of necessity—the conditional
necessity that depends on teleology, and the unconditional that does not (199b34–5). What is conditionally necessary is
needed to obtain the goal; we need a hammer, for example, because it is necessary if we want to drive nails into wood.
Such conditional necessity soon relies on unconditional necessity.32 For a hammer must be made of iron; and hence for
driving nails into wood we need something made of iron (200a11–13). Iron is conditionally necessary for hammering;
but the necessity of hammers to be made of iron reﬂects the unconditionally necessary nature of iron (200a8–9). It is
unconditionally necessary that iron is, and other things are not, hard enough for hammering; and statements of
conditional necessity must assume this sort of unconditional necessity.
This discussion shows that Aristotle thinks there is both conditional and unconditional necessity, and hence both
teleological and non-teleological explanation, in nature. It does not show whether he denies, afﬁrms, or allows that
teleologically explained events may also be explained non-teleologically by unconditional necessity. A passage in Parts of
Animals i, however, is more helpful (642a32–b4). There Aristotle argues that we can explain respiration by saying that it
happens for the

112

CHAPTER 5 § 60

sake of some end, but we can also say that ‘this happens because of this from necessity’ (642a32). He then
distinguishes the usual two types of necessity; and in describing parts of the process of respiration he appeals to
unconditional necessities (642a35–b3).
It follows that at least some parts of a process are non-teleologically explained even if the whole process is
teleologically explained. In that case, some events are explained both teleologically and non-teleologically, since each of
these parts of breathing will have both types of explanation.33 We take in cool air to breathe and to secure the beneﬁts
of breathing; at the same time we take it in because of the unconditional necessities about hot and cold. Here, then,
Aristotle seems to allow, indeed to require, two types of explanation for the same event.34
The evidence we have considered is not clear enough to show that Aristotle thinks everything explained teleologically
must also be explained non-teleologically. But he nowhere afﬁrms the incompatibility of the two types of explanation;
and if he did, he would be in open conﬂict with the particular cases we have discussed. Nor does he suggest why the
double explanation he describes should not be equally discoverable in all events that are explained teleologically. These
are good reasons for supposing that he admits the general possibility of double explanations.35
We have some reason, therefore, to believe that Aristotle ought to hold the third of the three answers we distinguished
earlier, that teleological claims refer to causally explanatory properties of events that may also have non-teleological
causal explanations. To believe in double explanations would be consistent with the ﬁrst answer, that teleological claims
are not ordinary efﬁcient-causal explanations at all; but this answer conﬂicts with Aristotle's basis for distinguishing
coincidences from ﬁnal causes. The second answer conﬂicts with the apparent possibility of double explanations. We
make most sense of Aristotle's different claims if we suppose he is committed to the third answer.
Still, he does not clearly present the third answer in the Physics; and if he had, he would have needed to revise some of
his argument. For we have seen that his account of teleology does not make its efﬁcient-causal assumptions clear, and
that if these were clear, the argument against Empedocles would need to be strengthened. His silence about the third
answer marks his failure to explore the implications of his different views and their effects on each other.

60. Teleology and Substance
Some of Aristotle's views on teleology and necessity are relevant to his claim in ii 1 that form as well as matter is the
nature of living organisms.

CHAPTER 5 § 60

113

To defend the claim, he ought to show that form is an internal origin of change for living organisms; he shows this if
he shows that the form is the ﬁnal cause. Final causation in natural organisms needs the right kind of efﬁcient
causation. Aristotle implicitly defends himself through (i) the deﬁnition of nature as an internal origin of change; (ii) the
implied primacy of the efﬁcient cause; (iii) the difference between ﬁnal causation and coincidence; and (iv) the claims
about teleology and necessity. But he does not use this implicit defence in his account of the formal and ﬁnal causes.
This conclusion about Book ii supports our view of the argument in Book i. There Aristotle accepts the commonsense
view that particular men and horses are substances, and that their constituent matter is not the only sort of substance.
But he seems to have no good defence of common sense against the view that since ordinary substances can be
reduced to matter and its coincidents, only mater is substance. In Book ii he defends common sense by claiming that
form is the nature and essence of natural organisms; but this claim is itself a commonsense assumption needing further
defence, and Aristotle does not offer the further defence.
These facts about Book i and Book ii have a common explanation, in Aristotle's conception of dialectical method. As
he uses and explains it in his reply to the Eleatics, it is not meant to defend common sense against a doubter, but to
show that common sense has no reason within itself to take the doubts seriously. If the accounts of matter, form, and
teleology are measured by this standard, then to some extent they succeed. For they show that the relevant beliefs are
entrenched in common sense; and they point out paradigmatic cases where we make conﬁdent judgments using the
concepts in question. Such arguments help to show that we need not doubt, from within the outlook of common
sense, the application of these concepts to reality.
Both in the Categories and in the Physics, however, Aristotle expects too much of his dialectical arguments. He does not
believe they are merely consistent; he thinks that if the Eleatic position conﬂicts with the Categories, the Eleatic position
is wrong. He assumes that the dialectical argument of the Categories has found objective principles, but he does not
defend his assumption.
Apart from this general question about the results of dialectic, it remains doubtful whether dialectic supports principles
as speciﬁc as those Aristotle accepts. Pure dialectic, relying on intuitive judgments, recognizes distinctions between
subjects and properties, and between classiﬁcation and characterization. In the Categories Aristotle relies on these to
support his claims about form as substance. But the dialectical arguments by themselves do not seem to support
Aristotle against Antiphon; though they recognize a distinction between substance and its

114

CHAPTER 5 § 61

coincidents, they do not show that men and trees must be substances.
The direction of the argument in Physics ii suggests what Aristotle has to add to the pure dialectic practised in the
Categories and in Physics i. He connects form and matter with causation, and implies, without explicitly stating, that the
efﬁcient cause is central. By marking these connexions, he commits himself to the truth of causal claims whose truth is
not assured by common beliefs themselves. His defence of form and teleology would be reasonable if the application
of these concepts to reality depended only on the sorts of conditions that are accessible to common sense; but the
causal components of these concepts assure us that common sense cannot settle the issue.
The causal aspect of claims about form produces internal tension within Book ii. It also emphasizes the difﬁculty of
reconciling the different remarks about form, matter, and substance in Books i and ii. Form has to be shape, nature,
substance, essence, and internal origin of change; but it is not clear how one thing can ﬁll all these roles.36 To be a ﬁrst
substance it apparently has to be a particular basic subject; but only matter seems to be the right sort of subject. To be
a second substance form has to be the essence of some ﬁrst substance; but if only matter is ﬁrst substance, the right
sort of ﬁrst substance seems to be lacking. To be an internal origin of change form must be properly related to an
efﬁcient cause; but Aristotle has not argued that form, as he conceives it, meets this condition. Though these are
distinct difﬁculties in the conception of form as substance, they have a common source; they are all results of the
method of pure dialectic.

61. Further Developments
Aristotle does not leave us without resources for possible solutions for some of the difﬁculties. The connexion
between formal and ﬁnal causes shows why he thinks something's form corresponds to signiﬁcant laws and
regularities. And we can see reasons for being guided by the existence of these laws in our judgments about which
things are basic subjects and ﬁrst substances. Once we are convinced of the truth of teleological laws, we have reasons
for recognizing ﬁrst substances deﬁned with reference to them.
If this is true, then closer attention to the causal role of form will actually throw light on the problems of Book i, and
explain to us why form can be a particular subject. We saw that a critic might challenge Aristotle's conception of the
subjects and ﬁrst substances there are by urging that the commonsense and Aristotelian conception rests on an
arbitrary preference; it treats some combinations of matter and

CHAPTER 5 § 61

115

coincidents as subjects and substances and dismisses others (e.g. musicians and white men) as merely coincidental
beings. Aristotle can show why the preference is not arbitrary, and why form is a genuine substance and subject, if he
can show that the formal cause is a genuine cause, properly related to the efﬁcient cause.
Such a defence of form would not require Aristotle to abandon dialectical for empirical argument. If he held that
teleological and non-teleological explanations of the same event are incompatible, then his belief in teleological
explanations would commit him to very speciﬁc and detailed empirical predictions. If he claims that some events with
non-teleological explanations also have ineliminable teleological explanations, his claim is empirically falsiﬁable, but
much less speciﬁc and much less easily falsiﬁed. Our evidence of goal-direction in particular systems or processes,
artiﬁcial or natural, might justify us in believing that a teleological explanation is correct, even if we did not know the
precise non-teleological efﬁcient-causal explanation that would assure us that there is the right causal connexion. Even
though we might be proved wrong, we may sometimes have good reason for not taking the possibility very seriously.37
Aristotle's argument suggests how he might reach a fuller statement and defence of his position. But he does not show
that he intends such a defence; and to reach it he would have to revise his dialectical approach to the questions. It is
important neither to underestimate nor to exaggerate the limitations of the argument. We should not assume that
Aristotle must have seen the implications of the causal claims that he commits himself to; had he seen them he would
have seen that the rest of his argument needs revision. Equally we must not pretend that he is a long way from seeing
the consequences of his own assumptions. If we see how far he has gone and how far he has still to go, we can see
some of the important differences between the Physics and the Metaphysics.
The Physics follows the purely dialectical method of the Topics and Categories, and applies it to one of the tasks assigned
to dialectic by the Topics—ﬁnding a way towards the ﬁrst principles of the sciences. A minimal interpretation of this
task makes it seem quite modest; Aristotle sometimes suggests that dialectic conﬁnes itself to removing puzzles and
misunderstandings that might lead us to think common sense is inconsistent. A more ambitious interpretation of the
dialectical task would suggest that dialectic offers a positive argument for ﬁrst principles that does not merely appeal to
consistency with common sense.
Aristotle's explicit view of dialectic in the Physics is closer to the ﬁrst view; his comments on the Eleatics express a fairly
modest claim for dialectic. Some of his arguments and their limitations are intelligible if

116

CHAPTER 5 § 61

his ambitions for them are modest. But he does not clearly stick to such a modest outlook. Some of his arguments and
suggestions might well lead us to think he intends to carry out the more ambitious task of offering positive arguments
for objective ﬁrst principles; and it is worth asking, irrespective of Aristotle's intentions, how well his arguments carry
out this task. In the Physics he suggests that the commonsense scheme of substance and the categories, supplemented
with the concepts of form and matter, will provide some of the ﬁrst principles of natural science; but his exposition of
the commonsense scheme itself assures us that it raises questions it cannot answer. If we are to ﬁnd objective, not
purely endoxic, ﬁrst principles, we apparently cannot simply rely on pure dialectic.

6 Conditions for Science
62. Science and Justication
A comparison of Aristotle's methods with his goal raises doubts about whether they reach it. The goal is deﬁned by his
metaphysics, and especially by his views about truth and natural priority. Objective principles are prior to, and logically
independent of, our beliefs; a belief is true because it ﬁts how things are, not the other way round. Hence the truth of
our beliefs must be logically independent of any of their internal properties—consistency, coherence, simplicity.
Aristotle's methods of inquiry, however, do not seem to justify belief in the objective truth of their conclusions. They
seem to fail for two reasons.
1. Metaphysical realism about truth might seem to imply that the coherence of one belief with another cannot be a
source of justiﬁcation. Since coherence is an internal property of beliefs, logically independent of their truth, why
should we think the coherent beliefs are true? Aristotle's methods, however, seem to be methods for reaching coherent
beliefs, and hence seem to do little to justify those beliefs.
2. Even apart from this general objection to coherence, we might doubt if Aristotle's particular arguments lead us
towards his goal. For dialectical inquiry seems to proceed from widely held beliefs, common sense, and ordinary forms
of speech, and to seek conclusions that are coherent with these. Even if we accept some appeals to coherence, we need
not suppose that every starting-point for seeking coherent beliefs is equally good; and we may doubt if Aristotle picks
the right starting-point, since the one he picks seems likely to include errors infecting the conclusions.
Aristotle notices this weakness in his methods. In his theoretical comments about dialectic he is quite reserved about
its prospects of reaching the truth. He does not openly express such doubts about empirical inquiry; but they would be
quite appropriate, and it is only Aristotle's over-simpliﬁed account of empirical method that conceals the difﬁculty
from him. He regularly contrasts the dialectician, who argues ‘according to belief ’, with the scientist, who argues
‘according to truth’.1
Understood one way, this contrast is indisputable. For the dialectician begins with beliefs that include true and false
ones. The scientist begins

118

CHAPTER 6 § 63

with premisses that are true, and it is none of his business to convince an interlocutor of their truth. Scientiﬁc
argument assumes the truth of the ﬁrst principles of the relevant science; and dialectic would lose its point if it went in
for scientiﬁc argument of this sort.
Aristotle, however, seems to intend a further limit on dialectic. He suggests that the conclusion is also a matter of belief
rather than truth, so that it is not justiﬁably asserted as true. On this view, dialectic cannot itself claim to discover the
truth. Indeed, he never claims that dialectic reaches the ﬁrst principles, but only that it has a way towards them; and
this does not require success in reaching them. In the Physics, Aristotle does not say that dialectic should prove the ﬁrst
principles, since he takes at least some ﬁrst principles to be self-evident, and only requires dialectic to remove puzzles
and confusions.2 If he limits dialectic in this way, he should defend his claim that the principles are self-evident.
We might reasonably expect an account of scientiﬁc knowledge to display the crucial difference from dialectic. Aristotle
needs to say what features of a discipline show that it argues according to truth and not just according to belief, how
we can tell if a discipline has these features, and how we can reach such a discipline. If he describes a science, but offers
no prospect of our reaching one, then he does not explain how his own inquiries reach their goal.
The Posterior Analytics describes the structure of a science and of the content of scientiﬁc propositions.3 Aristotle sees
the weaknesses we have noticed in his methods, and his views on justiﬁcation support and explain some of his
demands on scientiﬁc knowledge. These same views, however, seem to imply demands that he cannot meet within any
plausible conception of justiﬁcation.

63. Science and Universals
Aristotle's description of what the propositions of a science say, and what they say it about, conforms to the demands
of his metaphysical realism. Scientiﬁc propositions must be true, and known to be true; they must therefore
correspond to some objective reality (a reality that is logically independent of our beliefs about it). Since a science
purports to state truths about universals, not about particulars, universals are the primary subjects of which a science
predicates properties (APo 77a5–9, 83a30–5, 85b15–18, Met. 1003a14–15, 1059b24–7). If truths about universals
correspond to some objective reality, universals must exist. Aristotelian universals are not Platonic Forms existing
independently of particulars (rejected at 77a5–9, 83a22–5); but statements about them are not just about the particulars
that exemplify them. A science is intended

CHAPTER 6 § 63

119

to describe a natural, objective kind, not to distinguish kinds whose existence depends on being spoken of or thought.4
In claiming that a science offers explanations, Aristotle assumes the reality of universals. Explanations state laws that
refer to properties of particulars, and if the laws are true the properties must really exist. The laws do not simply say
that certain linguistic predicates or thought-dependent concepts are applied to particulars. A nominalist view would
undermine the claim of scientiﬁc propositions to meet metaphysical realist conditions for truth. Aristotle claims that
universals are better known by nature than particulars are, and he is justiﬁed in so far as propositions referring to
universals explain facts about particulars; but he would be completely unjustiﬁed if he took a nominalist view of
universals or scientiﬁc laws.
Since Aristotle requires scientiﬁc propositions to be about universals, he refuses to allow singular statements about
particulars to be part of science. The explanatory function of a science makes his restriction intelligible. The
explananda include facts about particular subjects, but the explanation of these facts will refer to a subject's essential
properties and to the properties derived from them, and will therefore refer to the appropriate universals. Since
scientiﬁc statements explain, they must be about universals.5 Facts about the nature of a subject explain some facts
about it; but in any individual case we will need perception to estimate the many different conditions that may affect
this case. Aristotle wants to distinguish the techniques needed to apply general laws from the knowledge that is
embodied in the statement of the laws. Hence he conﬁnes ‘scientiﬁc knowledge’ to the statement of these laws.
Aristotle's demand that scientiﬁc knowledge should grasp necessary states of affairs, those that ‘cannot be otherwise’
(71b9–16), is a further result of his concern for explanations referring to universals. What holds universally of a subject
must hold of it intrinsically.
By universal I mean what belongs to its subject in every case and in itself and as such; universals, then, evidently
belong from necessity. What belongs to the subject in itself is the same as what belongs to it as such. Point and
straight, e.g., belong to line in itself, since they belong to it as line; and two right angles belong to triangle as triangle,
since triangle is in itself equal to two right angles. (73b26–32)
An intrinsic property must be either an essential property or derived from the essence.6 Such a universal property is not
merely one that always happens to be true of the subject; for such an invariant property is distinguished from a proper
universal (73a32–74a3), and necessity is ascribed only to a proper universal.7 To ﬁnd universals and necessary truths
we must ﬁnd the essential properties and intrinsic concomitants

120

CHAPTER 6 § 64

of the subjects. These reﬂect the concern of science with explanation; for the intrinsic non-essential properties are
those that belong to the subject because it has the essential properties it has. An account of what holds necessarily of a
universal subject will derive some of the properties of the subject from others that explain them. Aristotle's demand
for necessity reﬂects his demand for explanatory laws.8

64. Explanatory Properties and Basic Subjects
If there is scientiﬁc knowledge, then, Aristotle assumes, there must be real natural kinds; and belief in these affects his
doctrine of substance. In the Categories, Aristotle's primary criterion requires a ﬁrst substance to be a basic subject,
neither said of nor inherent in a further subject. But to identify basic subjects and to distinguish them from nonsubstances (e.g. musicality) and combinations of substance and non-substance (e.g. musicians) he relies on rather
simple and intuitive tests. These tests are not reliable, since they seem to depend on the presence or absence of abstract
nouns in a particular language.
An argument in the Analytics, however, shows how Aristotle means to avoid inferences from apparently obvious facts
about predication to mistaken conclusions about subjects and substances. We say ‘The large thing is a log’ or ‘The
white thing is moving’ (83a1–4), as though white things were subjects.9 But Aristotle denies that they are subjects:
For whenever I say that the white thing is a log, then I say that the thing which has the coincident of being white is a
log, but not that the white thing is the subject for the log. For neither by being essentially white nor by being
essentially some white thing did it come to be a log, and hence 〈the white thing〉 is not 〈a log〉 except
coincidentally. (83a4–9)10
In some cases the apparent subject is really just a combination of subject and coincident, and hence not a genuine
single subject.
In this remark Aristotle tries to prevent abuse of the tests offered in the Categories. We might argue that white things or
musicians are subjects with predicates ascribed to them, and that they endure through change. But Aristotle answers
that these can be treated as subjects only because they belong to some more basic subject; it is because the white thing
is a log that it is long or short, and in saying that the white thing is a log we are identifying the more basic subject (the
log), not predicating some coincidental property of it (as when we say that the log is white).11
To apply Aristotle's tests, we must be able to decide when something is F by being G rather than by being F; and to do
this, we must distinguish the essential properties from the coincidents that they explain.12 If something's being F
explains its being G and the converse is

CHAPTER 6 § 65

121

not true, then the F is the basic subject, and therefore the substance, and the G is a combination of a substance with a
coincident. The appropriate description of a substance must identify the essential properties; that is why men are basic
subjects and musicians are not.13
Aristotle, therefore, accepts the demand in the Categories for a basic subject of predication, but shows more clearly than
the Categories showed that intuitive tests may not pick out basic subjects, and that commonsense subjects may not be
substances. He now claims that a substance must belong to a natural kind deﬁned by explanatory properties. If
common sense is very far wrong about these properties, Aristotle's views about substance and explanation will commit
him to the radical rejection of commonsense candidates for substance.

65. Explanatory Properties and the Arguments About Substance
Aristotle's tests for a genuine basic subject raise questions about his defence of his own candidates for substance. In
Physics ii he considers Antiphon's materialist attack on common sense; and in the Generation and Corruption he considers
Atomism. The tests in the Analytics, however, prevent him from simply appealing, as he does in the Physics, to wellentrenched common beliefs supporting ordinary views about substance and form. If the substantial properties are
those that explain other properties, commonsense candidates for substance must meet this condition. In the Physics
Aristotle does not clearly set out to meet this condition; but in the Analytics he clearly imposes it.
It is just the sort of test he needs to sharpen the issues about form and matter as substance. In Physics ii Aristotle
identiﬁes form with nature, an internal origin of change; if he is right, then something's formal properties will explain
its behaviour and movements. The Analytics shows how these claims affect the subject-criterion for substance; the
basic subjects must be deﬁned by the explanatory properties from which the other properties are to be derived.
If, then, Aristotle wants to reject Atomist views on substance, he cannot argue that the results of scientiﬁc inquiry are
irrelevant to decisions about the substances there are. He must argue, on the contrary, that scientiﬁc inquiry largely
conﬁrms and explains the common views about the substances there are. In his view, the explanatory properties will
not be very far from some intuitive classiﬁcations; for since he recognizes natural teleology, he thinks ordinary terms
for species and genera correspond to important explanatory properties.

122

CHAPTER 6 § 66

Nonetheless, he recognizes that ordinary classiﬁcations may contain homonymies that are to be eliminated in a
scientiﬁc classiﬁcation (97b7–39). Common sense kinds will be homonymous, not because of any semantic feature of
the kind-terms, detectable by common sense, but because common sense has not found the right explanatory
properties.14 We will remove the homonymy only by scientiﬁc inquiry that ﬁnds the explanatory properties. Aristotle
thinks it is sensible to begin from the kinds recognized by common sense; but he does not stop there.
These claims about science and substance are not surprising for a metaphysical realist. In accepting them Aristotle
shows that he intends a demonstrative science to meet metaphysical realist conditions. Our conclusion about which
things are substances, which properties are essential and which accidental, depends on the conclusions of science.
These conditions for being a substance do not conﬂict with those in the Categories and Physics; in fact the Physics refers to
the distinction between essential properties and intrinsic coincidents (193b25–8). But we have not so far found that
Aristotle tries to connect his views about explanatory properties with his criteria for substance. The Analytics marks the
connexions far more precisely; it still leaves Aristotle the task of showing how his criteria and candidates for substance
meet his conditions about explanation.15 These conditions support the claim of a putative substance to be a genuine
substance, an ineliminable constituent of an objective world; and so Aristotle should show that his favoured substances
meet this condition.
Aristotle tends to regard the results of dialectic as truths about an objective reality, not simply about the structure and
presuppositions of common sense. Still, it has not been clear that the dialectical argument of his earlier works entitles
him to ascribe to his conclusions the status he apparently intends for them. The Analytics states more sharply the
conditions that Aristotle's fuller discussions of substance, form, and matter have failed to meet.

66. Natural Priority in Demonstration
In discussing the ontology of a science we have already made some assumptions about its structure. Since essential
properties explain the others, and since this relation is to be mirrored in the structure of the science, statements about
the coincidents must be derived from those about the essence.
The proper way to transmit truth, necessity, and explanation is demonstration. In a demonstrative syllogism, as in an
ordinary syllogism, the premisses and conclusion are universal, and the conclusion

CHAPTER 6 § 66

123

follows necessarily from the premisses; but the premisses of a demonstration must also be true, necessary, and
explanatory of the conclusion. The demonstrative syllogism is intended to satisfy the demand for explanation, and to
display the appropriate relations between essential properties and coincidents.
The premisses of a demonstrative syllogism must also be prior to their conclusion, since a science is supposed to state
the ﬁrst principles and to derive other truths from them. Since the syllogism is scientiﬁc, the priority cannot just be
priority to us.
They must be explanatory, better known, and prior. They must be explanatory, because we know just when we
know the explanation; they must be prior if they are indeed explanatory; and they must be previously known not
only in the sense that we comprehend them, but also by our knowing that they are true. (71b29–33)
The premisses must be prior and better known by nature; demonstrative science makes them also better known to us.
Natural priority cannot simply be the result of our choice to put some propositions before others in our favourite
presentation of the science. In deﬁning the logical constants we can deﬁne ‘if . . . then’ and ‘and’ through ‘or’ and ‘not’,
or take ‘and’ as primitive and deﬁne ‘or’ through ‘and’ and ‘not’. If we choose one of these procedures we do not make
‘or’ naturally prior or posterior to ‘and’. Rather, the fact that we can do it equally correctly either way shows that
neither constant is naturally prior to the other. When the relation is natural priority, it cannot be equally correct to
deﬁne it either way.
Hence Aristotle insists that a proper deﬁnition must be through things ‘prior and better known’ (Top. 141a26–7), and
for the purposes of a science should be through things that are naturally prior and better known (141b3–34). Since
there is only one objective order of priority and knowledge, there cannot be several genuine deﬁnitions of the same
thing (141a31–b2, 141b34–142a9).16 Similarly, if the priority of one proposition to another is natural, it must
correspond to some fact about independent reality; and if it corresponds to such a fact, no other arrangement of the
propositions will correspond equally well to the fact.
Claims about natural priority and real ﬁrst principles express Aristotle's realist assumptions. We reach a correct grasp
of ﬁrst principles in so far as we grasp principles that are already, independently of our beliefs and theories, naturally
prior; and propositional principles are prior and better known by nature in so far as they mention the things that are
prior and better known. The propositional principles are not prior and better known because of some attitude we take
to them, or because we decide they will be the ﬁrst principles.

124

CHAPTER 6 § 67

Aristotle's realism about ﬁrst principles is a special case of his general views about truth. The truth of a proposition
consists in its correspondence to how things are independently of anyone's belief in the proposition (Met. 1051a34–b9,
1027b18–28).17 First principles are genuinely ﬁrst in so far as they correspond to things that are genuinely ﬁrst. They
provide true explanations in so far as they correspond to independent things that genuinely explain.

67. Natural Priority Compared With Epistemic Priority
Aristotle has some metaphysical realist grounds for believing that an order or priority in the objective world should be
reﬂected in the order of scientiﬁc knowledge, But it is important to see how his particular version of the demand for
priority relies on epistemological claims distinct from this realist assumption.
The demand for natural priority might be interpreted as a claim about the structure of explanation. Aristotle believes
that the explanans is naturally prior to the explanandum even if the existence of one implies the existence of the other;
hence, for instance, the fact that p is prior to the truth of the statement that p, because the fact explains the truth of the
statement and the converse is not true (Catg. 14b11–23).18 Given this condition for natural priority, the essential
properties that explain, and are not explained by, the intrinsic coincidents of a kind, are naturally prior to intrinsic
coincidents, and the premisses mentioning the explanatory properties are naturally prior to the conclusions drawn
from them. Since explanations reﬂect objective facts, not merely the interests or beliefs of the explainer, Aristotle
reasonably insists that the order in an explanatory demonstration is not a matter of choice, but must reﬂect the
objective relations between explanans and explanandum.19
Appeal to explanation, however, cannot justify all of Aristotle's demand for natural priority. He recognizes that
explanation justiﬁes a demand for priority (71b31), but he also demands priority in knowledge; if p is prior in
knowledge to q, then we can know p without knowing q but cannot know q without knowing p (71b31–3).20 Since he
demands natural epistemic priority, not just priority to us, Aristotle must mean, not that we can believe p without
believing q, but that we can have the right objective grounds for knowledge of p without knowing q. We must come to
know that x is F independently of knowing what it explains, and then ﬁnd that it explains x's being G. Aristotle can
admit that we come to believe that x is F partly as a result of believing that x's being F explains x's being G, but he must
claim that once we have reached the knowledge that x is F it is independent of the knowledge that x is G.

CHAPTER 6 § 68

125

This strong demand for epistemic priority by no means follows from acceptance of explanatory priority. On the
contrary, epistemic priority conﬂicts with one view of how explanations increase our knowledge. We may have reason
to believe that x is G and then ﬁnd that x's being F is the best explanation of x's being G; hence we might infer that x is
F. If we have sufﬁcient grounds for claiming to know that x is G, then we may be ready to claim knowledge that x is F
also. No doubt such a claim must also rely on connexions with other reasonable beliefs; but it remains true that part of
our warrant for claiming to know that x is F is our claim to know that x is G, and that this claim to knowledge itself
partly rests on the way that our belief in x's being G ﬁts into a good explanatory theory.
If we rely on inference to the best explanation to increase our knowledge, then we cannot claim that ‘x is F’ is
epistemically prior to ‘x is G’. Though the explanatory relation is asymmetrical, the knowledge of each proposition is
reciprocal; they will be simultaneous in our knowledge, with neither prior or posterior to the other. Aristotle cannot
rely, then, on the asymmetry of explanatory priority to justify his claim about epistemic priority.

68. The Case for Circular Demonstration
His argument for epistemic priority is easiest to see in Analytics i 3, where he considers alternatives to his conception of
demonstration.
Some think that because we must know the primary things, there is no knowledge; while others think that there is
knowledge, and that everything 〈knowable〉 is demonstrable. Neither of these views is either true or necessary.
For the ﬁrst party, those who assume there is no knowledge at all, claim that we face an inﬁnite regress. They
assume that we cannot know the posterior things because of the prior things, since these lead to no primary things;
and their assumption is correct, since it is impossible to go through an inﬁnite series. If, on the other hand, the
regress stops, and there are principles, these are, in their view, unknowable, since they are indemonstrable, and
demonstration is the only way of knowing that they recognize. But if we cannot know the primary things, then
neither can we know the things derived from them unconditionally or fully; we can only know them on the
assumption that we know the primary things. The other party agree that knowledge results only from
demonstration, but they claim that demonstration of everything is quite possible, since they think demonstration
can be circular and reciprocal. (72b5–18)
Aristotle rejects both an inﬁnite regress and a circle.
Defenders of a circle claim that every scientiﬁc proposition can be demonstrated, because demonstration may be
circular; we can claim to know p1 by appeal to p2, and in ﬁnding the ultimate premisses of p2 we

126

CHAPTER 6 § 68

will return to p1, so that p1 and p2 will be demonstrated both through themselves and through each other (72b15–18).
Aristotle replies that this circular argument results in no proper demonstration.
And clearly, unconditional demonstration cannot be circular, since it must be derived from what is prior and better
known. For the same things cannot be both prior and posterior to the same things at the same time, except in
different ways, so that, e.g., some things are prior relative to us, others prior unconditionally—this is the way
induction makes something known. If this is so, our deﬁnition of unconditional knowledge will be faulty, since there
will be two sorts of knowledge; or perhaps the second sort of demonstration is not unconditional demonstration,
since it is derived from what is better known to us. (72b25–32)
If we demonstrate p1 by p2, p2 by p3, and so on, and eventually reach p1 again, then p2, p3, etc. will be both prior to
p1, since they are among the grounds for p1, and posterior to p1, since p1 is among their grounds. We can allow the
same thing to be both prior and posterior only if on one occasion we mean ‘prior to us’ and on the other ‘prior by
nature’; but this distinction will not help to defend a claim about demonstration, which must refer univocally to what is
prior by nature.
Defenders of circularity can reply that they allow a type of natural priority. Each proposition that we know is
demonstrated, in their view, by a ‘local demonstration’; D1 demonstrates p1 with reference to its immediate ground p2,
D2 demonstrates p2 by p3, and so on, until Dn demonstrates pn by p1. Within each local demonstration the grounds
are prior to the conclusion; since p1 is not part of the ﬁnite demonstration of p1, p1 will not be prior to itself. Though
in D1 p2 is prior to p1, and in Dn p1 is prior to pn, we must not infer that p1 is prior to p2 and therefore prior to p1.
This defence claims to accept Aristotle's demand for natural epistemic priority, if it is conﬁned to ‘local priority’ (within
a given local demonstration), but must reject the demand if it is applied to ‘global priority’ (in the relation of one local
demonstration to another). For since local demonstrations form a circle rather than a hierarchy, they do not display the
sort of epistemic priority that is found in local demonstrations, and therefore demonstrations as a whole cannot display
global priority. From this point of view, Aristotle's criticism seems to combine the justiﬁed demand for nonconventional priority—satisﬁed by local demonstrations—with the unjustiﬁed demand for global priority—unsatisﬁable in circular demonstration.
Aristotle is entitled to demand global, not just local, epistemic priority, if he shows that circular argument does not
confer justiﬁcation; but he cannot fairly use the fact that circular demonstration allows only

CHAPTER 6 § 69

127

local priority as a reason for rejecting circular demonstration. His argument here seems to assume what it is supposed
to prove; for we will be convinced that there is something wrong with a system that prevents global priority only if we
are already convinced that there is necessarily something wrong with circular arguments. If Aristotle's argument is
stated fully, it seems to display the vice of circularity that he attacks in his opponents' position; for the circle in his own
argument seems too small to count as justiﬁcation for either of the disputable claims it includes.
Still, if Aristotle rejects circular justiﬁcation, his demand for global epistemic priority is intelligible. Though the fact that
circularity precludes global priority is not an independent reason for rejecting circularity, he might have other grounds
for rejecting it. Unless we have some independent reason to believe the premisses from which we derive p1, it is not
clear how they really give us reason to believe p1; without some independent reason, they seem to prove consistency
and to provide conditional support, but not actual justiﬁcation. We need some ground for believing the premisses that
is independent of the conclusion; but if it is no better than our ground for believing the conclusion, belief in the
premisses seems not to justify belief in the conclusion. If we express these doubts, we challenge coherence between
propositions as a source of justiﬁcation; and then Aristotle's demand for global epistemic priority may well attract us.

69. The Rejection of Coherence as a Source of Justication
The next argument (72b36–73a6) raises more explicitly this issue about the independent grounds for believing the
premisses of a demonstration. He argues that if the demonstration of p1 eventually reintroduces p1, it amounts to
saying ‘If p1, then p1’; ‘and if that is all it takes, it is easy to prove anything’ (72b34–5). Aristotle assumes that we offer
a series of conditionals: ‘if p1, then p2; if p2 then p3, . . . ’ until we come to ‘if pn, then p1’, and claims that if we believe
in circular demonstration we ought to be able to leave out all the intermediate steps and still have a demonstration, ‘if
p1, then p1’.
He must assume that demonstrations are transitive in the way that conditionals are; for he supports his claim by
remarking that from ‘Nec (if p1, then p2) & Nec (if p2, then p3)’ we can infer ‘Nec (if p1, then p3)’. But in assuming
that a series of demonstrations will behave like a series of conditionals, he seems to leave out the important features of
demonstration that he has pointed out himself. The premisses of a

128

CHAPTER 6 § 69

demonstration must explain the conclusion; and it is by no means clear that the explanatory relation is transitive in the
way the conditional or (on some views) necessity is.21 If the explanatory relation is not transitive, then the opponent
need not concede that he should have a perfectly good demonstration left even when he has dropped the intermediate
steps.
Aristotle might argue, however, that he is entitled to drop the intermediate steps from the alleged demonstration. For
they form a series of genuine, rather than merely possible, explanations only if they are known to be true; and
apparently we must know this before we can say whether they form an explanatory series; if we do not know this
already, we can fairly treat them as simply a series of conditionals. If this argument convinces us, we will also agree with
Aristotle in stating the putative demonstration in the form ‘If p, then p’, rather than ‘Since p, then p’. For simple
coherence without initial and independent credibility seems to offer us nothing more than a series of conditionals.
If Aristotle relies on this defence, his argument proves the impossibility of circular demonstration only on the
assumption that coherence provides no justiﬁcation. This more basic epistemological assumption, underlying his
explicit argument against circularity, supports the demand for global epistemic priority. The argument we have stated is
still rather rough; to estimate its force we need to consider more exactly what is implied in ‘coherence’ and in ‘initial
credibility’ and ‘independent grounds’. So far we have interpreted these conditions in ways that favour Aristotle's
objections; but we should not assume that we have interpreted them correctly.22 But so far it is reasonable to ﬁnd
Aristotle's demands attractive; though he does not clearly state his basic objections to circularity, they are clear enough
to allow a defence of his position.
His objections to circularity, and his more basic objections to coherence, are even easier to understand if he requires
justiﬁcation to give us reason for believing the truth of a proposition, and interprets truth in metaphysical realist terms,
so that it requires correspondence to an objective reality, not wholly determined by anyone's beliefs or possible beliefs.
We have already noticed that this metaphysical realist assumption underlies his contrast between science and other
disciplines or forms of inquiry. If we have coherent beliefs and can answer any challenge to them, it still does not
follow that we have found the truth, and hence it does not follow that we have found knowledge. Since coherence
informs us only about relations between propositions themselves, it may well seem to give us no reason to believe that
they are true of an objective reality.
This further objection to coherence makes it reasonable for Aristotle to demand epistemic priority. He will argue that
we can transmit

CHAPTER 6 § 70

129

justiﬁcation, of the sort required by metaphysical realism, from premisses to conclusions only if we are sufﬁciently
justiﬁed in claiming to know the premisses apart from our belief in the conclusions. If we attribute some argument of
this sort to Aristotle, we can understand his objection to circular demonstration, and the underlying objection to
coherence as a source of justiﬁcation; and in the light of this argument we can understand the demand for epistemic
priority.

70. The Rejection of an Innite Regress
Once Aristotle demands epistemic priority for the premisses of a demonstration, he has to claim that the most ultimate
premisses, the ﬁrst principles of a particular demonstrative science, are unprovable. His commitment is clear in his
rejection of an inﬁnite regress of demonstration (72b5–15).
The opponent suggests that since all knowledge is demonstrative, we must always derive every proposition known
from some further proposition. Once we rule out circular demonstration, we have only two unattractive options. (a) If
we never come to a ﬁrst and underived principle, we can never stop deriving principles from higher principles.
Knowledge therefore requires us to perform an inﬁnite task, and since we cannot do that, knowledge turns out to be
impossible; ‘we will not know the posterior things because of the prior if there are no primary things among them’
(72b9–10). (b) Suppose, then, that the regress is not inﬁnite, and that we eventually come to primary underived
propositions with none prior to them. Since all knowledge requires derivation from something prior, these primary
propositions will not be known, and so the posterior ones will not be known either (72b11–15).23
Aristotle agrees with his opponent's view that the ﬁrst option prevents knowledge because it implies an inﬁnite regress,
and therefore an inﬁnite task (72b10–11). He assumes that knowledge of p requires an actual demonstration of p from
some higher premiss q that we also know. Since we claim to know q, we must also demonstrate q from a still higher
premiss r, and so on; and since we claim to know each premiss, we must complete an inﬁnite task of demonstration
before we can claim to know anything. Since we cannot complete an inﬁnite task, we cannot, on these assumptions,
know anything.
Both Aristotle and his opponent, however, make a disputable assumption in supposing that if there is an inﬁnite
regress of propositions providing grounds for a claim to knowledge, anyone claiming knowledge faces the inﬁnite task
of demonstrating all these propositions. We might concede that there is an inﬁnite series of

130

CHAPTER 6 § 71

propositions, but claim simply that at each stage we must be able to ﬁnd a demonstration from a higher premiss; since
there is an inﬁnite series of propositions about which we must claim to know, we must agree that there is no upper
limit on the stages at which we may be asked for a demonstration, but it does not follow that to justify anything we
must actually produce an inﬁnite series of demonstrations.
On this view, the inﬁnite regress of knowledge might not impose an inﬁnite task on us if we want to justify claims to
knowledge. At each point we can offer a ‘local demonstration’, rather similar to what we might offer if we accept
circular demonstration; in each case we reject the demand for a justiﬁcation that displays all the justifying principles at
once and includes only principles that are prior to the proposition justiﬁed.
Aristotle ought to have considered this approach to the regress, which is parallel to the defence of circles by appeal to
local demonstrations. Defenders of each position might claim to accept the Aristotelian demand (for epistemic priority
in the one case, for a ﬁnite regress in the other), if it is narrowly interpreted (so that it applies only to local
demonstrations); perhaps Aristotle confuses this narrow and reasonable interpretation with the unreasonably broad
interpretation (demanding global epistemic priority in the one case, a ﬁnite regress of actual demonstration in the
other) that is needed to secure his conclusion.

71. Foundationalism
Aristotle rejects the narrow interpretation of his demands that allows inﬁnite regresses and circles of demonstration.
He assumes the wider interpretation, because he thinks nothing less will provide an adequate justiﬁcation. To justify
the conclusion, in his view, we must show conclusively, with no further question to be raised, that it is derived from
premisses that are prior and better known. We have not shown this if we can only offer a local demonstration, since
that leaves open a further question about the status of the premisses, and to settle this further question we need ﬁrst
principles that are prior and better known.
Since, in Aristotle's view, circular argument cannot show that ﬁrst principles have the appropriate status, we must
demand epistemic priority; and once we demand this, we cannot allow an inﬁnite regress. The demand for a conclusive
display of grounds leads us to demand ﬁrst principles that are grasped as true independently of the further
propositions they justify.
Aristotle therefore recognizes ﬁrst principles with no further justiﬁcation; but he denies that his view makes knowledge
impossible,

CHAPTER 6 § 72

131

because he denies that demonstration requires demonstrable ﬁrst principles. In denying this, he implies that in some
cases complete justiﬁcation is non-inferential, since it does not require derivation from other propositions. Noninferentially justiﬁed ﬁrst principles allow us to claim knowledge without facing an inﬁnite regress or a circle.24
Aristotle's conclusion implies a foundationalist doctrine, requiring true and non-inferentially justiﬁed beliefs as the
basis of knowledge and justiﬁcation.25 His treatment of the circle and the regress exposes his different reasons for
reaching such a conclusion. One reason results from his metaphysical realist conception of truth and the conviction
that coherence cannot provide justiﬁcation for believing a proposition to be true if truth is understood in metaphysical
realist terms. But this argument by itself does not show what would be wrong with an inﬁnite regress. Aristotle's
rejection of the regress relies on his demand for the complete removal of possible grounds for challenge. This demand
requires justiﬁcations to stop with principles that are non-inferentially justiﬁed; and the same demand will also explain
why circular demonstration must be rejected.
The demand for removal of grounds for challenge reﬂects another aspect of Aristotle's belief in the objectivity of
scientiﬁc knowledge. A scientiﬁc argument is not addressed, as a dialectical argument is, to a particular interlocutor,
and does not count as scientiﬁc by convincing particular interlocutors. A scientiﬁc argument for p should show not
merely that if you begin with appropriate beliefs you will have to accept p, but that p is rationally compelling
irrespective of anyone's initial beliefs. We ﬁnd such a defence of p if we show that it is a necessary consequence of
some principle that is rationally compelling in itself; this is the non-inferentially justiﬁed ﬁrst principle that Aristotle
demands as the basis of scientiﬁc knowledge.26

72. The Status of First Principles
Aristotle sees that he demands this of ﬁrst principles, since he requires them to be known through themselves:
The true and primary things are those that have their credence (pistis) not through other things, but through
themselves. For in the case of principles of a science, a further reason must not be sought; rather, each principle
must be credible (piston) itself in its own right. (Top. 100a30–b21)
. . . the rest are proved through the principles, but these cannot be proved through any other things, but it is
necessary to come to know each of them by a deﬁnition. (Top. 158b2–4)
No proof should be given of a principle, because ‘it must necessarily be

132

CHAPTER 6 § 72

true because of itself and seem true’ (APo 76b23–4). The principles are ‘evident’ (phaneron) and known because of
themselves; Aristotle compares an attempt to prove them with a deductive argument about colours offered by
someone blind from birth (Phys. 193a4–9).27 A sound deductive argument could be constructed, but it would not be a
demonstration, and it would be a waste of time for someone with sight; to the sighted person it will simply be evident
that there are colours, and this further argument will not increase his conﬁdence in the conclusion.
This comparison with what is self-evident to the senses makes it clear how strong a claim Aristotle intends for our
grasp of ﬁrst principles. Demonstration must be from what is prior and more credible (pistotera), and since nothing is
prior to the ﬁrst principles they must be known (gnôrizein) through themselves. The demonstrative scientist should rely
on these principles and should not attempt to demonstrate them.
About these 〈sc. the demonstrated propositions〉 the geometer should give an account from geometrical
principles and conclusions; but the geometer qua geometer should not give an account of the principles. (APo
77b3–6)
An attempt to prove them would be a form of begging the question (APr 64b28–38).28
In claiming that the principles are known through themselves, Aristotle cannot simply mean that nothing else is needed
to justify them within the demonstrative system; he must also mean that nothing else is needed to justify them at all. If
the principles are primary within the demonstrative system, the reason cannot be that this is how we have chosen to set
up the system; such merely conventional priority falls short of Aristotle's demands. Even the non-conventional priority
in the explanatory relation falls short of epistemic priority. Neither conventional nor merely explanatory priority can
justify the primacy of the ﬁrst principles in a demonstration.
For the same reason, Aristotle cannot concede that someone other than the geometer gives a genuine proof of the
geometer's ﬁrst principles of demonstration; for a genuine proof requires principles that are naturally prior to the
geometer's principles, implying that the geometer's supposed principles would not be ﬁrst principles after all. On the
other hand, a merely dialectical argument could not show that the geometer's principles are naturally primary, and so
could not justify their place in the demonstrative system. Aristotle's demands for epistemic priority rule out all types of
non-inferential justiﬁcation, not merely demonstration. The principles are not entitled to their primacy unless they are
non-inferentially justiﬁed altogether.
Aristotle's demand for self-evident ﬁrst principles is not an anomaly, and does not result from some superﬁcial aspects
of his views about

CHAPTER 6 § 72

133

science and knowledge. He can defend it from some of his central views on ﬁrst principles—his demand that they
satisfy a metaphysical realist conception of truth and his demand that they satisfy objective conditions for knowledge.

7 Puzzles About Science
73. Intuition
We have seen how Aristotle's account of scientiﬁc knowledge develops from his metaphysical realism and his
epistemological foundationalism. His account implies that dialectic cannot itself give us sufﬁcient reason for claiming
to have found ﬁrst principles of science. Aristotle therefore owes some different account of our grasp of ﬁrst
principles; and he needs to show that it does not raise puzzles worse than those it avoids. In this chapter I will argue
that he sketches the appropriate sort of account, and that the puzzles it raises are serious enough to justify us in
reexamining the assumptions that lead him to it.
If Aristotle claims that we are not inferentially justiﬁed in accepting ﬁrst principles, we should infer that we grasp them
by some sort of non-inferential intuition. The knower must grasp self-evident principles as such; for if they are grasped
non-inferentially, without any further justiﬁcation, they must be grasped as true and necessary when considered in
themselves, with no reference to anything else. If ﬁrst principles are to meet all Aristotle's conditions, they must be
grasped by intuition that certiﬁes that they have the relevant properties.
Intuition is needed, then, to secure the epistemic priority that Aristotle demands. This priority implies that our
knowledge of the lower principles depends on our knowledge of the higher, but our knowledge of the higher is
independent of our knowledge of the lower. If we reject intuition, we cannot guarantee the appropriate asymmetry in
knowledge, and can no longer claim that the highest principles are prior in knowledge. If we deprive Aristotle of any
belief in intuition, we deprive him of his grounds for claiming that his principles satisfy his demand for epistemic
asymmetry, and therefore leave him to face his own objection to coherence as a source of justiﬁcation.1
These claims of Aristotle's make it clear that he needs a doctrine of intuitive cognition, and the doctrine will not be an
isolated error, but will result from central epistemological assumptions of the Analytics. His conception of
demonstration embodies a foundationalist conception of justiﬁcation. The right sort of foundation must avoid both
inﬁnite regress and vicious circle; and Aristotle can meet this requirement only if he recognizes self-evident ﬁrst
principles grasped by intuition.

CHAPTER 7 § 74

135

74. The Doctrine of Intuition
Aristotle says the ﬁrst principles are grasped by ‘intellect’ or ‘understanding’, nous (100b5–17).2 Nous of ﬁrst principles
must be aware of the principles as true, primary, and best known. We must be justiﬁed in believing them apart from
our belief in anything else; this epistemic priority makes them cognitively prior. And we must be aware of being better
justiﬁed in believing them than in believing anything else; that is what makes them best known, and removes any
objective ground for challenging them.3
His remarks about nous and about the cognitive status of ﬁrst principles show that he sees what he is committed to, and
thinks he can accept the consequences. In Analytics ii 19 he undertakes to discuss ‘about the ﬁrst principles, how they
come to be known (gnôrimoi), and what is the state that knows them (gnôrizousa)’ (99b12–18). The ﬁrst question seems
to consider the operations that result in the grasp of ﬁrst principles; the second question seems to consider the state we
are in when we possess them (‘what is the state that knows (gnôrizousa) them’) (99b17–19).4 Not surprisingly, both
induction and nous are mentioned in the answer; the claim that ‘we must come to know the ﬁrst principles by induction’
(100b3–5) suggests the process, and nous is perhaps understood as the product, though not necessarily excluded from
the process.5
The product, however, cannot depend for its warrant on the induction that has produced it; for such warrant would
not explain how a proposition grasped by nous could be naturally prior to the demonstrated propositions derived from
it.6 Aristotle insists strongly on the natural priority of the propositions grasped by nous.
Since (1) among the states of mind that yield truth some are always true . . . ; (2) these are scientiﬁc knowledge and
understanding (nous); (3) no kind 〈of state〉 except understanding is more exact than scientiﬁc knowledge; (4) the
principles of demonstrations are better known 〈than the conclusions〉; (5) and all scientiﬁc knowledge requires
an account (logos); it follows that (6) there can be no scientiﬁc knowledge of the principles; and since (7) there can be
nothing except understanding that grasps the truth more than scientiﬁc knowledge does, (8) it follows that
understanding 〈is the state that〉 grasps the principles. (100b5–12)
In steps (3) and (4) of this argument Aristotle reafﬁrms his demand for natural epistemic priority in the premisses of
demonstration. In (5) he infers that they cannot be objects of scientiﬁc knowledge, since it requires inferential
justiﬁcation (‘requires an account’), and the arguments against the regress and circle rule out inferential justiﬁcation.
Nothing other than scientiﬁc knowledge and understanding is even a

136

CHAPTER 7 § 75

candidate for grasping principles, because of steps (1) and (2); these are the only cognitive conditions that are deﬁned
so as to certify the truth of what they grasp. Once we accept (5), we must accept (6); and then either we must agree that
we have no appropriate grasp of the principles, so that demonstration is impossible, or we must accept (7) and (8),
recognizing non-inferential intuitive cognition of the principles. Without a doctrine of intuition Aristotle would leave a
striking gap in his account of scientiﬁc knowledge.7

75. Intuition and Inquiry
We may be reluctant to agree that Aristotle demands an intuitive, non-inferential grasp of ﬁrst principles, if we think it
conﬂicts with his views on method. He is invariably hostile to any who think they can ﬁnd appropriate ﬁrst principles
by simply trying to intuit them; he insists on a careful survey of the relevant appearances and puzzles before we try to
form any theory. But if he thinks ﬁrst principles can after all be intuited, does he not take the sort of illegitimate shortcut he criticizes?8
Aristotle can fairly reply that this allegation mistakes the appropriate place and time for intuition. Not just anyone's
untrained and inexperienced judgment about self-evidence is proof of self-evidence. Discovery of the appropriate ﬁrst
principles demands the right experience; and when we have this we will be able to see what is self-evident. Aristotle
does not claim, indeed he denies, that what is self-evident in itself will always seem so to us before we inquire.
The demand for preliminary inquiry does not, however, trivialize the demand for intuition. Experience and familiarity
with appearances are useful to us as a way of approaching the ﬁrst principles; they may be psychologically
indispensable as ways to form the right intuitions. But they form no part of the justiﬁcation of ﬁrst principles.9 When
we come to have the right intuition we are aware of the principle as self-evident, with no external justiﬁcation. That is
its real nature, and that is what we grasp after we have used ordinary methods of inquiry. The acquisition of nous is not
meant to be magical, entirely independent of inquiry. Nor, however, is it simply a summary of the inquiry, or a
conclusion that depends on the inquiry for its warrant.
Hence a demand for intuition does not conﬂict with Aristotle's claim that empirical inquiry, induction, or dialectic is a
way towards ﬁrst principles. Their heuristic role does not, in his view, imply any justifying role. These methods of
inquiry do not certify for us that we have found a ﬁrst principle, and we are no longer engaged in them when we are
aware that a principle is self-evident.

CHAPTER 7 § 76

137

To this extent dialectic and empirical inquiry have the same function and the same limitations. But the difference (as
Aristotle conceives it) between them may still affect their respective claims to be a suitable basis for reaching selfevident and objectively correct intuitions. In the Analytics Aristotle mentions perceptual appearances and induction as
the methods for forming a scientiﬁc theory, but never attributes this role to dialectic, though he does not expressly
exclude it; and some differences between empirical and dialectical inquiry may explain his silence.
The two forms of inquiry deal with different ranges of appearances; empirical inquiry begins from perceptual
appearances, and dialectic begins from common beliefs. Aristotle is conﬁdent, though without sufﬁcient reason, that in
empirical inquiry we can isolate the true appearances, without relying on any further theory, before we form the theory
we are looking for; and these perceptual appearances might seem to offer a ﬁrm objective basis for intuition of ﬁrst
principles. Disciplines that rely on perceptual appearances will, to this extent, be entitled to claim the truth and
objectivity that are needed for a science. In dialectical argument, however, he does not claim to have found a
completely ﬁrm pre-theoretical basis for ﬁrst principles; it is more obvious here that the ﬁrst principles and the
appearances are adapted to each other.10
Dialectic, then, has two limitations: (1) Like empirical inquiry, it provides at most the basis for intuition, and does not
itself contain or produce the proper grasp of ﬁrst principles. (2) Unlike empirical inquiry, it does not even provide a
suitable basis for intuition, since we lack sufﬁcient assurance about the objective correctness of the appearances that
are its starting-point. Aristotle should have seen that this second objection to dialectic works equally well against
empirical inquiry; but since he does not see this, he normally contrasts demonstrative science, based on intuition of
ﬁrst principles, with dialectic rather than with the results of empirical inquiry. It will be useful to explore the contrast
with dialectic a little further, always remembering that in fact the problems raised by dialectic spread further than
Aristotle realizes.

76. Dialectic and Justication
Aristotle's reservations about dialectic help to explain why he thinks demonstrative science requires ﬁrst principles
grasped by intuition. Dialectic argues according to belief; its solutions are shaped by the common beliefs it starts from,
and are always open to challenge by anyone who rejects the starting-point. Scientiﬁc knowledge, on the other hand, is
supposed to be beyond any challenge based in the

138

CHAPTER 7 § 76

objective facts; and such knowledge cannot, for Aristotle, rest on dialectical argument alone. Since dialectic seems to
yield coherence, not truth, it is not clear why we should believe that its results are ﬁrst principles of the sciences. In
exposing this weakness in dialectic, Aristotle claims to expose a serious weakness in Plato's account of the foundation
of the sciences; and in appealing to intuition he claims to remove this weakness.
For Plato dialectic is the systematic practice of the Socratic cross-examination that is displayed in the early dialogues. It
has the gymnastic and peirastic functions recognized by Aristotle; but it also has the constructive task of approaching
ﬁrst principles. Indeed this is a crucial difference between dialectical thought (noêsis) and the hypothetical thought
(dianoia) that relies on assumptions without asking for any account further of them.
〈At the stage of dianoia〉 the soul is compelled to use assumptions . . . , not proceeding as far as a ﬁrst principle, since it is not
capable of reaching higher than assumptions. (Rep. 511a3–6)
〈Dialectic〉 treats the assumptions not as ﬁrst principles, but as being in reality assumptions, as places to set out
and advance from, until it advances to what is not an assumption, reaching the ﬁrst principles of everything.
(511b4–7)11
〈Dialectic〉 must assemble the disciplines they learnt in isolation in their previous education, so that they see as a
whole (sunopsin) the connexions between disciplines, and in the nature of what there is . . . And this is the most
important test of whether someone's nature is apt for dialectic or not, since the person who can see things as a
whole (sunoptikos) is a dialectician, and the one who cannot is not. (537c1–7)12
Plato assumes that the ‘synoptic’ outlook of dialecticians allows them to justify the special principles of different
sciences.
This synoptic outlook requires us to appeal to coherence; for it will make us aware of the relation between different
principles, and the effects of accepting or rejecting one putative principle on our other principles. If dialectic uses these
synoptic methods to justify the principles of the special sciences, then Plato must assume that the coherence displayed
by dialectical argument is a source of justiﬁcation.
Aristotle agrees with Plato that since the special disciplines are deductive, and assume the truth of their ﬁrst principles,
dialectic is needed as a way towards ﬁrst principles. Plato, however, also believes that dialectic reaches ﬁrst principles,
and hence the dialectician has the best claim to genuine scientiﬁc knowledge (epistêmê; Rep. 533d4–e2). Aristotle, by
contrast, denies that dialectical method actually reaches the ﬁrst principles of the special disciplines; these special
disciplines are the genuine sciences, and dialectic is not a science at all.13

CHAPTER 7 § 77

139

77. Criticisms of Dialectic
In Aristotle's view, the pretensions of dialectic to reach a supreme science above the special disciplines rest on
assumptions that are exactly the reverse of the truth. Metaphysical realism about truth, combined with foundationalism
about justiﬁcation, excludes any Platonic justiﬁcation of the ﬁrst principles of a special science. The particular sciences
must be shown to make justiﬁed claims to objectivity; but dialectic can never justify such claims, since all it can reach is
coherence. Plato's conception of the supervisory role of Platonic dialectic assumes that coherence is a source of
justiﬁcation; but Aristotle's attitude to the regress of justiﬁcation is foundationalist. Since he cannot accept Plato's view
of justiﬁcation, he cannot appeal to dialectic for justiﬁcation, but must show that ﬁrst principles meet his
foundationalist conditions.
Aristotle's dispute with Plato about the powers of dialectic rests on a question about Plato's whole philosophical
method. Dialectic proceeds by Socratic inquiry, beginning from the interlocutor's beliefs, but Plato thinks this method
can transcend these beliefs and tell us how things really are. Aristotle is not convinced; he refuses to recognize the
conclusions of dialectic as scientiﬁc knowledge of ﬁrst principles.14
Since a science can claim objectivity, but dialectic cannot justify the claim, another source of justiﬁcation is needed.
Aristotle ﬁnds it in perceptual appearances. A special science can claim objective truth because it explains a speciﬁc
range of appearances; and since different ranges of experience seem appropriate for treatment by different theories, the
different special sciences will be autonomous. Aristotle claims autonomy for the special sciences, by demanding
principles that are ‘proper’ (oikeiai) to their conclusions; and he insists on this condition even though it is sometimes
hard to apply (76a26–30).
The proper principles are those that are special to a particular discipline, and not derivable from the principles of a
more general science.15
It is evident that the special principles of a particular area cannot be demonstrated; for those principles 〈from
which the special principles would be demonstrated〉 will be the ﬁrst principles of everything, and the science of
them will be in charge of everything (kuria pantôn). For if one has knowledge from higher causes, one has scientiﬁc
knowledge to a higher degree; for one has knowledge from prior causes whenever one has it from causes that have
no causes . . . But demonstration does not extend to another genus . . . (76a16–23)
Aristotle assumes that the ultimate principles of a special science are ultimate without qualiﬁcation. An alleged
universal science ‘in charge of everything’ would have to ﬁnd more ultimate principles; but Aristotle

140

CHAPTER 7 § 77

thinks it cannot succeed. Dialectical argument cannot yield more ultimate principles than the intuitively grasped
principles of the special sciences, since dialectical conclusions cannot be naturally prior to the principles grasped by
intuition. It is both pointless and hopeless to look for external principles that will justify the special principles of a
science.
Aristotle's foundationalist assumptions about justiﬁcation explain why he disagrees with Plato both about the role of
dialectic and about the possibility of a universal science. The second disagreement is really a product of the ﬁrst; for
since mere coherence does not yield the sort of justiﬁcation that satisﬁes a metaphysical realist's demands on a science,
dialectic cannot produce the right sort of justiﬁcation, and can neither be a universal science itself nor vindicate the
claims of any other discipline to be a science.
Moreover, no non-dialectical conception of a universal science is at all plausible. No range of appearances beyond
those underlying the special sciences is available to support a more general science; and once the claims of dialectic are
rejected, the prospect of displaying coherence will not seem to support the claims of a universal science. Aristotle has
no reason to value Plato's synoptic method of justiﬁcation. He has no reason to try to connect the principles of
different sciences; connexions would result in a more coherent range of theories, but, in Aristotle's foundationalist
view, it would add nothing to their justiﬁcation.
Aristotle agrees with Plato that the premisses of a demonstrative science must be in some way prior to, and better
known than, the conclusions. The assumptions must be shown to be non-arbitrary, and some further source of
justiﬁcation must be found. Unlike Plato, however, Aristotle rejects coherence as a source of justiﬁcation; he therefore
demands epistemic priority, and this demand leads him to claim that the principles are self-evident.
The doctrine of intuition supports the autonomy of different sciences. Intuition shows us that a principle is true and
primary in itself, not because it is derived from anything else; and no further appeal to coherence is necessary or
relevant. Hence no higher science provides the metaphysical basis for a special science. Plato thought dialectic should
do this for a special science because the special science could not give an account of its own principles, and so could
not justify them. Aristotle agrees that a special science cannot give an account of its principles, and denies Plato's
inference that it cannot justify them. For intuition confers justiﬁcation with no account; it allows Aristotle to reject the
pretensions of Platonic dialectic and to defend the autonomy of the special sciences. Conversely, if he gives up the
doctrine of intuition, he will ﬁnd it harder to answer the Platonic claims about dialectic.
Aristotle's dispute with Plato, then, highlights his own views about

CHAPTER 7 § 78

141

knowledge, truth, and justiﬁcation, and shows why he needs a doctrine of intuition. Dialectic and empirical inquiry are
stimuli and occasions for intuition, but do not justify belief in an intuitive principle once we have reached it. Dialectic
argues according to belief, but intuition takes the ﬁrst principles beyond the inﬁrmities of belief.
For these reasons, even apart from the more direct evidence, it is reasonable to ascribe to Aristotle a doctrine of
intuitive nous that grasps ﬁrst principles. If we refuse to ascribe this to him, we leave him with unanswered questions;
his foundationalist views about justiﬁcation and his objections to Plato will create demands that he does not try to
satisfy. It is more reasonable to accept the evidence for a doctrine of intuitive nous, and to allow Aristotle some answer
to the problems that he evidently raises and very probably sees that he raises.

78. Objections to Aristotle's Solution
Reluctance to ascribe a doctrine of intuitive nous to Aristotle partly rests on doubts about the truth of such a doctrine.
These well-founded doubts raise problems needing Aristotle's further attention.
After sufﬁcient experience we might well treat a principle as self-evident to some degree, so that we ask for no grounds
for it, entertain no doubt or question, regard any conﬂict with another proposition as a reason for rejecting the other
one, and refer to it in proof of others. We could defend our unquestioning attitude by pointing out that this principle
explains the appearances and yields the other principles of the science. But an appeal to these features of the principle
is an inferential justiﬁcation; hence, though our unquestioning attitude may seem like nous, it cannot be nous, since it
rests on this inferential justiﬁcation. If, on the other hand, we can offer no such defence of the principle, we will
justiﬁably doubt whether we are right to take it for granted. In either case we do not satisfy Aristotle's conditions for
nous.
Aristotle agrees that we lack the right intuitions if we are inexperienced in the appearances; but he argues that dialectic
and empirical inquiry are simply means of discovery, not essential for justiﬁcation. If he denies any justifying role to the
inferential connexions of a principle with other beliefs, he must explain the privileged heuristic role of dialectical and
empirical inquiry. He might say that they are just psychologically useful for reaching stable convictions about principles;
if we are already familiar with the appearances, we are less likely to encounter unfamiliar appearances that undermine
our conﬁdence in the principle.16
But if inquiry has only this role, it seems to be dispensable; for we

142

CHAPTER 7 § 78

could make our convictions stable without inquiry, if we were dogmatic enough, and protected our convictions from
exposure to possibly recalcitrant appearances. If we admit this, we cannot explain why our preferred methods of
inquiry should be preferred as ways to discover principles to be grasped by intuition. We might want to say that these
methods are preferable because they give us better reasons for believing the principles we reach; but that is the very
argument Aristotle cannot use if he wants to show that principles are grasped by nous in such a way that they need no
inferential justiﬁcation.
Apparently, then, Aristotle cannot plausibly combine the claims he wants to make about ﬁrst principles, how we are
aware of them, and how we reach them. His own view of what the principles are makes it especially clear that he
cannot say all he wants to say about them. For the principles are not merely basic and obvious truths, such as the
Principle of Non-Contradiction, that might seem to be self-evident to everyone; obviousness is not a condition for
being grasped by nous. Nor are they simply the elementary perceptions that might seem necessary as a basis for any
inquiry.
Aristotle accepts neither the rationalist nor the empiricist conception of the principles that are appropriate objects of
intuition.17 He correctly believes that to justify the claims of science within foundationalist constraints he must
recognize intuitively grasped principles that do not seem self-evident to everyone. The principles include those that he
thinks must be the product of rational inquiry. But he cannot explain why they must be the product of such inquiry
without conceding to inferential connexions a justiﬁcatory role that he rejects.
These objections to Aristotle's doctrine of intuition suggest that his foundationalist assumptions, applied to the ﬁrst
principles of scientiﬁc knowledge, force him into an indefensible position. But to reach this conclusion is not to ﬁnd a
reasonable alternative; even if foundationalism leaves us with a mystery, appeals to coherence may preclude even a
prospect of proper justiﬁcation. Philosophers resort to foundationalism or to coherence from a keen sense of the
inadequacies of the opposite position. We might agree that each side relies on unattractive assumptions, but still insist
that the third option, scepticism about justiﬁcation, is even less attractive. Aristotle's objections to coherence lead him
to believe, correctly, that only a doctrine of intuition will satisfy his demands; but he has not made his doctrine
plausible, except by suggesting that it is the only alternative to coherence.
Our objections ought to suggest that foundationalism may be worse off than an appeal to coherence would be. For it
requires a cognitive state that we have good reason to think is impossible; alleged non-inferential justiﬁcations are
either inferential or not justiﬁcations. A justiﬁably

CHAPTER 7 § 79

143

unquestioning attitude to ﬁrst principles must appeal to the relation of the principles to other beliefs, and so eventually
relies on coherence after all.
If our efforts at justiﬁcation force us back to coherence, we should reconsider the objections to coherence as a source
of justiﬁcation. A coherence theory of justiﬁcation requires something whose possibility is at ﬁrst difﬁcult to
see—some ground for proceeding beyond claims about coherence to claims about truth, construed in metaphysical
realist terms. Unless this difﬁculty is really an impossibility, coherence is better off than intuition, since the doctrine of
intuition demands a cognitive state that is apparently impossible. So far, then, we must incline to coherence.

79. Intuition and the Common Principles
It is especially difﬁcult for Aristotle to account for the general principles that a special science takes over from outside
its proper range. His foundationalism and empiricism lead him to reject the claim of any discipline, and especially
Platonic dialectic, to be a universal science; but he still must explain how we can claim knowledge or intuition of these
general principles.
The relevant general principles include the ‘axioms’ or ‘common principles’ (76a38), those ‘which someone must grasp
if he is to learn anything’ (72a16–18). Because they are necessary for all the special sciences in common, they are not
proprietary to any one special science.
The sciences have in common the common 〈principles〉—by ‘common’ I mean those that a science uses in so
far as it demonstrates from them, not those the science demonstrates about, nor what it demonstrates. Dialectic is also
common to all the sciences, and so 〈would be〉 any 〈science〉 that tried to prove the common 〈principles〉
universally, e.g. that everything must be afﬁrmed or denied, or that equals result if equals are removed, or others of
that sort. Dialectic is not assigned to any deﬁnite genus in this way 〈sc. in the way a science is〉. For if it were, it
would not ask questions; for in the course of demonstrating we cannot ask questions, since if contraries are
〈assumed〉, the same thing is not proved. (77a26–34)
A genuine science, Aristotle assumes, must deal with some deﬁnite genus; but since beings as a whole do not constitute
a deﬁnite genus, and they would be the only genus appropriate to a science that demonstrated the axioms, there is no
such science. Nor can dialecticians hope that their interrogative techniques applied to the axioms will lead to the
principles of any science.

144

CHAPTER 7 § 79

No range of appearances could support a universal science. And even if there were such a science, it could not
demonstrate the axioms, since there are no prior and better-known principles from which the axioms could be
demonstrated.18 Nor can we grasp an axiom by intuition. Intuition grasps the ﬁrst principles of demonstration, and
since each axiom is perfectly general, intuition would have to grasp it as a ﬁrst principle of a general science; since there
is no general science, no such intuition is possible. The universal science of the axioms is purely counterfactual.19
The axioms would raise no difﬁculty for Aristotle's account of science if he were willing to treat them as mere matters
of belief, resting on dialectical argument.20 But he apparently cannot treat them this way; for every demonstrative
science must rely on them, and if they are mere matters of belief, demonstrative science essentially contains these
ineliminably non-scientiﬁc components, threatening its scientiﬁc status.21
But though Aristotle speaks of the axioms as common principles, he thinks this is a misleading way to speak of them.
They are common by analogy, because 〈each〉 is useful to the extent that it falls within the genus studied by the
science. A common principle is, e.g., that if equals are taken from equals, equals are left. Each of these is adequate
to the extent that it falls within the genus; for it will have the same effect 〈for the geometer〉 if he assumes it only
for magnitudes, not for everything, and it will have the same effect for the arithmetician if he assumes it 〈only〉
for numbers. (76a38–b2)
The principle that is assumed is deﬁned by its use and effects in the special science that assumes it:
. . . and this is not needed universally, but to the extent that it is adequate, and it is adequate as applied to this genus.
By ‘as applied to the genus’ I mean the genus about which one adduces the demonstration. (77a23–5)
Strictly speaking, then, there are no common principles assumed both in geometry and arithmetic; and so there is no
subject-matter for a universal science. We will intuit a version of an axiom as a principle of our special science; we need
not assume the sort of general intuition that would have to belong to a general science of all reality.22
This device of dividing the axioms shows how they can be ﬁtted or forced into the structure of autonomous
demonstrative sciences. But Aristotle must extend it beyond the axioms. Each science takes over conclusions of the
‘logical’ branch of dialectic. In this area Aristotle does not entirely reject Platonic ambitions. Though the study of
predication in general does not reveal Platonic Forms, he thinks it shows something about the nature and structure of
reality. The study of relations between

CHAPTER 7 § 80

145

particulars and Forms is replaced by the study of relations between substances and non-substances.
Aristotle thinks logical dialectic is different from a Platonic science; and admittedly it does not reveal non-sensible
Forms, entities that are beyond the range of common beliefs. Nor does it constitute a science; it does not claim
knowledge that entitles it to prescribe to the special sciences. Still, Aristotle's beings are not just what common sense
recognizes; if Plato requires us to revise or go beyond common sense, Aristotle may require us to do the same.
Moreover, Aristotle certainly thinks all inquiry must presuppose the doctrine of the categories; and we may wonder
why the doctrine should not be part of a general science.
Each special science must therefore presuppose, for instance, the dialectical doctrine of the categories (96b15–21), and
the dialectical distinctions between essence and coincident, species and genus, particular and universal. The science,
however, cannot attribute to them simply the status that is warranted by dialectic; for the conclusions of dialectic are
only matters of belief, and before they can be taken over into a special science they must be grasped by intuition, and
therefore must be divided, as the axioms are. Each special science must rely on its own special version of the doctrine
of the categories; and this special version will be only analogous to the doctrine assumed by another special science.
The conclusions of dialectic play still another crucial role. The argument in the Analytics about demonstrative science is
not demonstrative, but dialectical, relying on common beliefs about knowledge, deﬁnition, essence, explanation, and so
on.23 This dialectical argument is part of what the educated person must understand to see the special status of a
demonstrative science; the grounds for admitting the special status of demonstrative science are not themselves
demonstrative or scientiﬁc, but dialectical.24 Aristotle frustrates the whole aim of his account of science if he must
admit that the whole structure of demonstrative science rests at a crucial point on nothing but belief. To avoid
admitting this he must divide the conclusions of the Analytics, just as he divided the axioms, among the special sciences.

80. Difculties in Aristotle's Position
Aristotle divides ostensibly general principles so that he can make each special version of a general principle a suitable
object of intuition within a science, not simply a conclusion of dialectic, which is a mere matter of belief. But if he splits
the dialectical conclusion into special versions for the different sciences, he adduces no new consideration in its
favour, and

146

CHAPTER 7 § 80

can hardly prescribe any new cognitive attitude to it; why should it suddenly become an object of intuition rather than
belief? If we say that it is an object of intuition simply because we have declared the special version of the dialectical
conclusion to be a principle of the science, we make it a matter of convention and choice that something is an object of
intuition; and that is the very thing Aristotle wants to avoid. He cannot reasonably claim that the mere act of splitting a
dialectical conclusion makes a limited version of the conclusion an object of intuition.
He might suggest, then, that a special version of a dialectical conclusion becomes an appropriate object of nous in so far
as we see that it is fundamental and necessary within a special demonstrative science. But to see this, we must see how
the special version is related to the other propositions of the science; and then we seem to return to an inferential
justiﬁcation. Moreover, it is hard to see how the appearances underlying, say, a biological theory give us some special
reason for asserting a special version of the doctrine of the categories; our reasons are the general reasons that underlie
the dialectical conclusion about the categories in general.
Any attempt to explain how special versions of dialectical conclusions become appropriate objects of nous seems to fail,
and Aristotle seems to have no plausible account of how they could ﬁt into demonstrative science. The questions
raised by dialectical conclusions only highlight our previous difﬁculties about intuition. The difﬁculties are not quite so
clear with special principles that do not have to be split; but the source of the trouble is the same. To show why
something is an appropriate object of intuition Aristotle must appeal to the inferential justiﬁcation he rejects.
And yet, Aristotle cannot simply admit that demonstrative science rests partly on dialectical argument. All objective
scientiﬁc knowledge, in his view, rests on principles that are better known than the conclusions; but if common
principles are simply conclusions of dialectic, they are simply matters of belief. If putative scientiﬁc knowledge rests
partly on belief, there is no genuine scientiﬁc knowledge.
This unwelcome result emerges directly from Aristotle's requirements for science, his views on justiﬁcation, and his
conception of dialectic. Scientiﬁc knowledge must be justiﬁed in claiming access to an objective reality; but coherence
between beliefs cannot yield this sort of justiﬁcation; and dialectic secures only coherence between beliefs. He has good
reasons for accepting each one of the three assumptions that together prohibit him from making dialectic the
foundation of science; and so if he also seems to be forced to rest science on dialectic, something is badly wrong in his
basic principles.

CHAPTER 7 § 81

147

81. Consequences of Aristotle's Position
Aristotle's attack on Platonic dialectic may usefully be compared with the attempt by twentieth-century positivists to
free science from metaphysics. Like the positivists, Aristotle rejects the pretensions of a non-empirical discipline
claiming to be a science and to prescribe to the genuine empirical sciences; the alleged universal science has no claim to
objectivity, since any such claim can be justiﬁed only by appeal to deﬁnite items of experience. Just as Aristotle rejects
Platonic dialectic, positivists reject any a priori metaphysical foundation for empirical science.25 They allow philosophy
to be an account of the conceptual structure of ordinary language or of the language of science. Similarly, though
Aristotle abandons Platonic ambitions for dialectic, he accepts dialectic for the study of common beliefs, and especially
for understanding the claims made by a science.
Positivists have found it difﬁcult, however, to interpret philosophical claims as claims about the nature of language
rather than the world, and have found it difﬁcult to interpret science itself without some metaphysical assumptions;
even the ontology assumed by science seems to involve empirically unveriﬁable metaphysical claims. To avoid such
claims, some positivists resort to the claim that adoption of an ontology is a matter of choice and convention rather
than correspondence to reality. But this device for avoiding metaphysics rests on a misconstrual of the difference
between convention and discovery; it fails to show that the ontological assumptions of a science are merely
conventional in any sense that prevents them from being genuine questions about the non-linguistic facts.26
In any case, the positivist must interpret not only the statements within a science, but the arguments of positivist
philosophy itself; and since these do not seem to be arguments within any science, they seem to be non-scientiﬁc,
metaphysical, and therefore, in a positivist's view, meaningless. For this reason, the positivist attempt to distinguish
science from metaphysics has often seemed self-defeating. Philosophical arguments have to be treated as accounts of
conventions, as linguistic proposals and stipulations; and such a treatment raises the same doubts about the force of
appeals to convention.
Aristotle's position is not as clearly self-defeating as the positivist position has often seemed to be, since he is not
forced to agree that dialectical statements are meaningless. He does claim, though, that they constitute belief rather
than knowledge, and he therefore faces an analogue to the positivist's problem; for he must explain why we should
admit that the common principles presupposed but not proved by the sciences are objectively true. We must have
good reason to believe this if

148

CHAPTER 7 § 82

we are to retain our conﬁdence that the sciences are genuine sciences, true accounts of an objective reality; but
dialectical arguments for the principles yield only coherence with common beliefs. For Aristotle as for the positivist,
the non-scientiﬁc status of philosophical argument seems to undermine the whole project of explaining why scientiﬁc
argument is superior to non-scientiﬁc argument. Science presupposes conclusions of non-scientiﬁc philosophy; it
therefore seems to be infected by the non-scientiﬁc status of its presuppositions.
Aristotle's difﬁculties suggest that he should reject some of his assumptions about truth, knowledge, and justiﬁcation.
Still, the assumptions themselves seem reasonable. The objections to coherence as a source of justiﬁcation legitimately
force the defender of coherence to show how Aristotle has underestimated it. The doubts about coherence are
especially reasonable for Aristotelian dialectic. Coherent common beliefs seem to fall short of knowledge, in so far as
we seem to lack reasonable grounds for being conﬁdent that they are not all false, or that we have not modiﬁed them
in a direction that leads us further from the truth. Even if we accept some sort of coherence as a source of justiﬁcation,
we may not think dialectic provides the sort of coherence that ought to satisfy us.

82. The Unsolved Puzzles
In the Analytics Aristotle tries to show how scientiﬁc knowledge both escapes the limitations of Aristotelian dialectic
and renounces the baseless ambitions of Platonic dialectic. But his conception of justiﬁcation imposes on him an
unacceptable doctrine about intuition of ﬁrst principles. To resolve the difﬁculties he raises, he might give up his
assumption that knowledge must rest on principles with at least the cognitive status of knowledge.27 But if he does, he
cannot allow that just any old belief is a sufﬁcient basis for a claim to knowledge; he must still distinguish the sort of
belief that is a proper foundation from the sort that is not.
Alternatively, Aristotle might allow that some sort of coherence justiﬁes claims to knowledge. He must then describe
the right sort of coherence, and say whether dialectic can provide it. If dialectic provides it, then a general dialectical
science may be possible. Plato will be proved right, and Aristotle will have to restate his views on the autonomy of the
special sciences and their relation to dialectic.
A defence of justiﬁcation without intuition should answer the different claims and assumptions that lead Aristotle to
foundationalism: (1) If coherence is taken simply to be a relation between propositions, it

CHAPTER 7 § 82

149

does not seem to yield justiﬁcation; some of the propositions must be initially credible, and a mere relation between
propositions does not ensure this. (2) If justiﬁcation justiﬁes us in believing that something is true, and truth requires
correspondence to objective reality, then a mere relation among beliefs does not guarantee the appropriate relation
between beliefs and objective reality, and hence does not yield justiﬁcation. (3) If justiﬁcation requires conclusive
removal of all grounds for challenging a belief, then circular or inﬁnitely regressive arguments will not confer
justiﬁcation; no form of coherence will make any belief beyond challenge in principle.
The combination of these three objections to coherence supports Aristotle's version of foundationalism. But together
they seem to impose unsatisﬁable demands. For the third objection requires intuition for ﬁrst principles; but when we
try to explain why some propositions are more appropriate than others for being grasped by intuition, we seem to
reintroduce the inferential justiﬁcations that an appeal to intuition was supposed to avoid. Aristotle's assumptions
about knowledge and justiﬁcation do not seem to yield a solution to the problems he has raised for himself; either the
sort of intuition he advocates is indefensible or (if the right defence is found) it is superﬂuous.
If Aristotle's third objection results in an unsatisﬁable demand, we might consider the consequences of giving it up. We
answer the ﬁrst objection if we ascribe initial credibility to the appearances and common beliefs; we can certainly be
asked to give reasons for doing this, and presumably our answers will appeal to still further common beliefs (e.g. about
the reliability of the processes by which common beliefs seem to have been formed). The second objection requires us
to show why we should regard one reconstruction of common beliefs, as opposed to other logically possible
reconstructions, as most probably true. We will see how Aristotle faces this requirement in other works.
We tried to distinguish objections to intuition within a science from objections to intuition applied to general principles
that a science takes over from outside. The two sorts of objections are connected; for once we see that intuition is not
appropriate for the general principles, we may ﬁnd similar objections to it for special principles. However, the
connexion between the objections may not be obvious; and this is important for our expectations about Aristotle. If he
comes to admit that dialectical argument can yield scientiﬁc conclusions, we need not expect him to abandon entirely
his doctrine of intuition of special principles. Concessions to dialectic are certainly a reason for reconsideration of
intuition; but we cannot assume that Aristotle will reconsider everything he should.
If Aristotle sees any of the difﬁculties in the project of the Analytics,

150

CHAPTER 7 § 82

then we ought to expect him to reconsider his views on dialectic, and with them his views on coherence as a source of
justiﬁcation and knowledge. And if he is more favourable to dialectic, we should see whether he can ﬁnd the sort of
argument he favours for the sort of general principle that special sciences must assume but cannot justify. In describing
what we ought to expect we have described the programme of the Metaphysics.

II Solutions to the Problem

This page intentionally left blank

8 The Universal Science
83. The Aims of Metaphysics
We have found that if Aristotle is to defend his ﬁrst principles as objectively true, not merely the products of common
sense, he needs to show how they can be defended by scientiﬁc argument. But his conception of science seems to
make scientiﬁc argument unsuitable for the defence of ﬁrst principles. In his view, a science must demonstrate its
theorems from self-evident ﬁrst principles, and these principles must be grasped by self-certifying intuition; we cannot,
then, justify the ﬁrst principles by any argument. Outside the special sciences we can use dialectic; but since dialectic
concerns belief, not truth, it cannot justify any of our principles.
The Metaphysics should help us with these difﬁculties, because it announces, describes, and uses a new science. In Book
i Aristotle calls it ‘wisdom’ (sophia) and ‘philosophy’ (philosophia), the science of the ultimate causes and principles. He
assumes that a science is about causes and principles of some sort; and in looking for the causes studied by philosophy,
he relies on a dialectical survey of the common beliefs about the wise person (982a4–19). He accepts the common
view that the wise person knows about everything, but not because he has encyclopaedic knowledge:
We suppose, ﬁrst, that the wise person knows everything, as far as possible, but not by having knowledge of each
thing individually. (982a8–10)
. . . This feature of knowing everything belongs necessarily to the one who, more than anyone else, has the universal
science, since he knows, in a way, all the things falling under it. (982a21–3)1
Aristotle seems to recognize the possibility of a completely universal science.
In describing his inquiry as the task of ‘wisdom’ and ‘philosophy’, he already claims scientiﬁc status for it. For in the
Organon he normally applies the terms ‘philosophy’ and ‘philosopher’ to the demonstrative scientist, in contrast to the
dialectician.2 In doing this the Organon rejects Plato's claim that dialectic has the right to be called philosophy because it
is a universal science, and asserts that only a demonstrative, departmental, discipline has the right to be called science
and philosophy.

154

CHAPTER 8 § 83

But whereas the Organon rejects the universal science as a Platonic fantasy, Metaphysics i expresses no caution or doubt.3
In Book iii, however, Aristotle acknowledges that we face severe puzzles in explaining how it is possible and what it is
like; and indeed the conception of science in the Organon raises severe difﬁculties for the possibility of a universal
science. In Book iv, therefore, he begins to explain how a universal science is possible, and, in particular, what method
it will follow; he now calls the universal science ‘the science of being qua being’ or ‘ﬁrst philosophy’.
These names show how the science is universal. Since it treats beings in so far as they are beings, and not in so far as
they are numerable or changeable, its conclusions apply to all beings alike; and since these are the most general features
of beings, they are the ultimate and ﬁrst principles, and the science studying them is properly called ﬁrst philosophy.
After describing ﬁrst philosophy, Aristotle tries to show that it is an actual and useful discipline, not a mere logical
possibility. He turns to some of the questions that have the appropriate universal relevance to be studied by a universal
science; and he practises ﬁrst philosophy, ﬁrst in Book iv, in arguing for the Principle of Non-Contradiction, and then
in Books vii-ix, in an extended argument about the nature of substance.4
The ﬁrst questions arise about Aristotle's view of ﬁrst philosophy. For if the Organon prohibits any genuine science with
the scope of ﬁrst philosophy, Aristotle must revise his conception of a science. He needs to revise it in any case, since
the Analytics solves some epistemological problems about science only by raising worse ones. If Aristotle denies that
either a universal science or dialectic can prove ﬁrst principles, he leaves them with no justiﬁcation; but ﬁrst philosophy
offers further possibilities.
It is equally important to continue the investigation of ﬁrst philosophy beyond Book iv, and in particular to examine
Aristotle's discussion of substance, to see if it is inﬂuenced by his conception of ﬁrst philosophy. He returns to
questions about ﬁrst and second substance, matter and form, particular and universal, that he discussed in his earlier
works. We found reasons for dissatisfaction with Aristotle's conclusions in those earlier works, and our reasons were
closely connected with limitations in his methods of argument. The discussion was purely dialectical, and we found no
reason to claim objective truth for the conclusions. In so far as Aristotle seems to claim to have found objective
principles, his conclusion seems unjustiﬁed.
The Metaphysics, in contrast to earlier works, represents the discussion of substance as part of the science of being.
Though Aristotle presents some ‘logical’ argument (1029b13), he claims to go beyond it: ‘Certainly

CHAPTER 8 § 84

155

we ought to examine how one ought to speak on a particular question, but we ought no less to examine how things
are’ (1030a27–8).5 If the discussion is genuinely scientiﬁc, Aristotle should be able to claim objective truth for its
conclusion. In doing so, he should be able to answer some of our still more general questions about the apparent
conﬂict between dialectical methods and realist conclusions. In the Metaphysics he defends his claim to have found
objective, not merely endoxic, principles. He has seen that he cannot adequately defend his principles by purely
dialectical argument limited to common beliefs. We must see how far the allegedly scientiﬁc arguments of the
Metaphysics really differ from the confessedly dialectical arguments of the earlier works, and whether they are arguments
for the same conclusions.

84. Wisdom and Scepticism
Since philosophy, as Aristotle conceives it in Metaphysics i, aims at knowledge of the highest causes and principles, it
faces sceptical doubts about the possibility of any route to objective ﬁrst principles. The inquirer has to begin from
common beliefs, perceptions, and the beliefs of previous inquirers. The sceptic tries to show that each of these
starting-points is so unreliable that it casts doubt on all our conclusions. Both common beliefs and the views of
previous theorists seem to disagree with each other; we ﬁnd that equally convincing-looking arguments can be found
for contradictory conclusions. This argument from disagreement becomes a standard sceptical weapon, providing the
motive for sceptical surveys of the history of philosophy.6
The sceptical conclusion rests on a realist assumption—that genuine knowledge of the world would have to be
knowledge of an objective world, and so of properties that it has independently of our beliefs and appearances.
Protagoras rejects the sceptical conclusion by rejecting the realist assumption. In his view, the apparently conﬂicting
appearances correspond to many different ways the world is—for the different people who have these different
appearances. If Protagoras is right, then Aristotle's belief in things being as they are by nature, and especially in things
that are naturally or intrinsically prior to others, must be rejected.
Though Protagoras offers a way out of scepticism, he demands a higher price than Aristotle wants to pay. Aristotle's
metaphysical realism must allow a possible gap between the conclusions of our inquiry and the way things really are;
and this gap must leave logical room for sceptical argument. Non-realists leave the sceptic no room when they close
the gap between our conclusions and the world in itself; but Aristotle cannot close this gap without rejecting his
account of the

156

CHAPTER 8 § 84

aims and point of inquiry. He will be better off if he can show that his metaphysical position leaves room for sceptical
doubts that his methods can answer.
Protagoras' solution, however, is a natural conclusion from some Aristotelian premisses. For though Aristotle wants to
ﬁnd objective principles, his methods seem to justify us only in believing that we have found a plausible and consistent
account of the appearances; and they suggest that someone else might have begun from the same appearances and
reached different, equally plausible, conclusions. Protagoras has won part of what he sought, if Aristotelian conclusions
have only a Protagorean status, not the status Aristotle wants to claim.
The danger of reaching a sceptical conclusion from surveying the history of philosophy encourages some non-sceptics,
including Descartes, to turn away from historical study.
Concerning objects proposed for study, we ought to investigate what we can clearly and evidently intuit or deduce
with certainty, and not what other people have thought, or what we ourselves conjecture. 〈In reading past
philosophers,〉 . . . we would always be uncertain which of them to believe, for hardly anything is said by one
writer the contrary of which is not asserted by some other. It would be of no use to count heads, so as to follow the
view which many authorities hold. For if the question at issue is a difﬁcult one, it is more likely that few, rather than
many, should have been able to discover the truth about it.7
Descartes thinks only an intuitive grasp of ﬁrst principles can free us from the endless controversy leading to
scepticism.8
Aristotle believes that the study of past philosophers is productive and useful because it is a special case of dialectical
inquiry. His methods suggest his implicit answer to both Protagoras' and Descartes's use of arguments from
conﬂicting opinions. He maintains that common beliefs and perceptions are not the hopeless confusion of conﬂicting
appearances that sceptics make them seem to be. He argues that when we apply normal and accepted tests to
discriminate among common beliefs, they are widely agreed, and we can isolate a body of them that are not open to
serious challenge. They still raise serious puzzles, and leave some questions unanswered—that is why inquiry is worth
while; but they support enough agreement to begin the inquiry.
A more explicit answer to scepticism emerges from Metaphysics i. To a Protagorean the history of Greek speculation
might well appear to be a sequence of equally arbitrary claims about objective reality, resulting in a series of insoluble
disputes. Aristotle wants to show that the different claims are not arbitrary; the right approach to past philosophers
shows why some of their claims seemed reasonable, and why it was hard to avoid some of their errors. He also wants
to show that the disputes are

CHAPTER 8 § 85

157

not insoluble; once we see why different theorists went wrong, we can also see the solution that they could not
have seen.9
Aristotle's aims are expressed in the distinctive structure and argument of the historical survey in Metaphysics i. He does
not simply test the views of his predecessors dialectically, against common beliefs; he tests them against some very
general assumptions that are themselves tested against the questions raised by his predecessors. Since wisdom is the
science of the highest causes, we need to know what these are. Aristotle suggests that there are four types of
causes—his usual four—and then begins to examine his predecessors, to see how many of the four they have found
(983a24–b6). He expects to show that ‘either we will ﬁnd some other kind of cause or we will have more conﬁdence in
the causes that we are speaking of now’ (983b5–6).
Aristotle shows that he does not intend to take the doctrine of the four causes for granted. He expects us to ﬁnd either
that it is reasonable or that it needs to be changed. Its status as a statement of common sense and appearances does
not protect it against revision; and if Aristotle is willing to revise it, he does not assume that his argument is adequate if
it is merely based on common beliefs. He expects the examination of past philosophers and of the belief in four causes
to lead closer to the truth on both questions. A historical inquiry is nothing new for Aristotle, but his conduct of it in
the Metaphysics indicates the distinctive outlook of this work; and the organizing principle sets Metaphysics i apart from
Aristotle's other historical surveys.10

85. Universal Science and the Four Causes
Aristotle argues that because his predecessors failed to recognize all the causes, or failed to understand them properly,
they could not explain everything that needs explanation. They found or nearly found the four causes, because the
appearances (986b31) and ‘the truth itself ’ led them and compelled them to search (984a18–19, b9–11; cf. PA
642a14–28, Phys. 188b28–30). The initial questions should lead a reasonable inquirer into further questions that are
answered only by appeal to the four causes.
The materialists recognize only a material cause, and regard the whole universe as a single stable material subject that
changes its non-essential properties (983b6–18). These theorists have to explain the variation of non-essential
properties at different times; and they cannot simply mention the permanent subject and its composition, since these
alone do not explain why the changes happen at some times and places rather than others. The further cause that is
needed is the efﬁcient cause,

158

CHAPTER 8 § 85

essentially referring to the change that explains the different behaviour of different bits of the original subject. It
follows that we cannot answer the materialists' own questions if we agree with them in recognizing only the material
cause.11 Even though they do not initially recognize the efﬁcient cause, their own questions, not some questions raised
by another theorist from within quite a different theory, require the recognition of an efﬁcient cause. Aristotle therefore
conﬁrms his claim that the efﬁcient cause is one of the causes; and his argument is not purely dialectical.
He suggests that we must also recognize a formal cause, to say what something is, and so to state the deﬁnition that
describes the thing's substance (987a19–22, 988a8–11, 988a34–b6). For we admit an efﬁcient cause when we want to
explain the change that happens to one bit of the material subject and not to another, and so we distinguish different
bits of the subject and the different ways they change. Since the deﬁnition and essence are supposed to include those
properties of the subject that explain its other properties and behaviour, explanation of the changes in different bits of
the subject will refer to deﬁnitions. To recognize distinct, relatively constant, deﬁnable bits of the original material
subject is to concede part of what Aristotle conceives as the formal cause.
These deﬁnable bits of matter cannot be deﬁned simply by their material composition. The Presocratic materialists
assume that such a deﬁnition need only list the thing's material composition, since they identify the substance of things
(ousia, 983b10) with a material stuff. If they are wrong about deﬁnitions, we must recognize a formal cause distinct
from the material.12 And we can see they are wrong, once we recognize an efﬁcient cause. Both porridge and oatcake
contain oats, water, and salt; but they react differently with other things, partly because their ingredients are combined
in different proportions. The deﬁnition must refer, not simply to the ingredients, but also (as the Pythagoreans saw) to
the proportion, and so must introduce a minimal degree of form. This is certainly far less than Aristotle normally
includes in form; and in Book i he does not say how far beyond such a minimally formal property we must go in
explaining change. He is not to be faulted for his silence. The whole task of Books vii-ix is to argue for a more deﬁnite
view of the formal cause; and in Book i Aristotle conﬁnes himself to introducing a formal cause of the most minimal
sort, showing why the questions about form must arise for a self-conscious inquirer.13
Aristotle thinks his predecessors never quite managed to distinguish the ﬁnal cause. To explain goodness they appealed
to whichever of the other causes they more or less recognized; but they overlooked the distinctive features of the
ﬁnal cause:

CHAPTER 8 § 86

159

For those who speak of mind or love treat these causes as good, but do not speak of anything that is either being or
coming to be for the sake of these, but rather speak of change as coming from these. (988b8–11)
Those who appeal to the Platonic Forms fail in the same way to see the distinctive features of the ﬁnal cause
(988b11–16). The distinctive logical features of explanation referring to some goal are lost in the attempt to identify
ﬁnal causation with the ordinary sort of efﬁcient causation. Aristotle's predecessors assume that the good that is in fact
the end of action must be its efﬁcient cause, and Aristotle agrees that ﬁnal and efﬁcient causation are connected; but he
thinks the connexion is less simple than such an account makes it appear. His predecessors' view conﬁnes ﬁnal
causation to the pattern that Aristotle sees in the design production of artifacts; but he believes that a proper
understanding of design shows why there may be ﬁnal causation without design.14
In Metaphysics i as elsewhere, Aristotle offers no a priori argument, and no exhaustive empirical argument, to show that
all and only the four causes must be recognized. But still his method is different from, say, the introduction of the four
causes in Physics ii or Parts of Animals i. In those other works Aristotle speaks as though he can read off the four causes
from the appearances and from ordinary ways of speaking about causes. In Metaphysics i he suggests a further defence
of his view. He stands outside his own view of the appearances, and shows why his predecessors could have answered
their own questions better by recognizing the four causes.
The argument is still ad hominem, in so far as it assumes that the Presocratics were asking reasonable initial questions.
They could avoid the force of Aristotle's argument by simply giving up their initial search for an explanation, once they
see that this search forces them to recognize more causes than they initially recognized. But this does not seem a
reasonable response to Aristotle's argument; his initial assumptions about explanation are quite weak and minimally
controversial, and it is difﬁcult to see how we could still be interested in explanation if we gave them up. In its choice
of starting-points Book i differs from pure dialectic, and in the aim and scope of its argument it anticipates Book iv.
Both books claim to conduct a scientiﬁc, not a merely dialectical, inquiry.

86. The Character of Universal Science
Aristotle argues that his predecessors have found the causes to some degree, but only ‘dimly’ (985a13, 988a23,
993a13). They have been ‘mumbling’ (985a5, 993a15).15 They are like unpractised boxers, who can strike lucky blows,
but are not acting from knowledge (985a10–18).

160

CHAPTER 8 § 86

In explaining his complaint Aristotle also clariﬁes his conception of wisdom.
We might suppose that wisdom is an encyclopaedic ﬁrst-order science, including the principles of all the departmental
sciences. This was the aim of Aristotle's predecessors. But his criticism shows that they were conducting ﬁrst-order
inquiry relying on erroneous second-order assumptions about the proper conduct of the ﬁrst-order inquiry; and the
errors in their assumptions show that we need a second-order universal science.
Aristotle thinks his predecessors have been looking for answers to questions that they have not properly understood,
and have overlooked questions that they ought to have asked. They have not realized what causes they ought to look
for, and they have not formed the right conception of the causes they have looked for. The aim of a universal science is
to answer these questions that are preliminary to the conduct of ﬁrst-order inquiry, not to offer another theory in
competition with ﬁrst-order theories. A second-order science may be universal even if ﬁrst-order sciences must be
departmental. Though no single set of principles implies the truths of both arithmetic and physics, a single set of
principles may show that arithmetic and physics should investigate two different sorts of causes. In Metaphysics i
Aristotle argues that we need this sort of second-order science.
On this point he accepts Plato's claim that dialectic not only ﬁnds ﬁrst principles, but also defends its view of the right
principles to look for. The practitioners of the sciences resting on assumptions cannot see the limits of their knowledge
until the dialectician points out that there is a type of ﬁrst principle that they have not found (Rep. 511a3–c2).16 In the
Organon Aristotle allows some of this role to dialectic, in so far as he assigns it a critical function; but he does not assign
this function to any science, since he does not count dialectic as a science. In the Metaphysics, however, he thinks the
four causes should not be taken for granted on the strength of common beliefs, and that some further scientiﬁc
argument is needed.17
To this extent Book i justiﬁes us in taking the Metaphysics to be a metaphysical inquiry; as Kant says, ‘ . . . in dealing with
reason it treats of those elements and highest maxims which must form the basis of the very possibility of some
sciences, and of the use of all’.18 Kant suggests that metaphysics is second-order, in so far as it examines, not the
questions about the world that directly concern inquirers into nature, but the questions raised by the assumptions
made by these inquirers. Aristotle's universal science is second-order in this sense. His questions arise in the course of
reﬂexion on the successes and failures, agreements and disputes, of those who inquired into nature and tried to explain

CHAPTER 8 § 87

161

changes in the physical world. The second-order questions come after (meta) physical inquiry, because comparison of
different attempts to ﬁnd the causes of change suggests that something is wrong with the prevalent conceptions of
causes, and that therefore the ﬁrst-order theories will be signiﬁcantly misguided. Aristotle claims that the second-order
questions admit of scientiﬁc, not merely dialectical, argument, and that the result will be a universal science.

87. Puzzles About Universal Science
Book iii discusses puzzles about the science that is assumed in Book i:
In the search for the science we are looking for we must ﬁrst treat the issues that ought to raise the ﬁrst puzzles;
these issues are those raised by other people's views on them, and also any apart from these that may turn out to
have been overlooked. (995a24–7)19
‘The science we are looking for’, marks two features of the universal science. First, we do not have it yet, since we are
still looking for it. Second, we would like to have it, since otherwise we would not be looking for it; Book i has shown
that other inquirers have made mistakes because they have not answered questions that this science would answer. In
the puzzles Aristotle explores these two features of the projected science.20 The puzzles form two main groups, each
group concerned with one of the two features of the ‘science we are looking for’.
The ﬁrst four puzzles are methodological, or, more exactly, puzzles about the nature and possibility of universal
science itself, suggesting that we cannot say clearly what it will study or how it will conduct its study (995b4–27). These
puzzles show that we are still looking for the universal science and have not yet found it.
The other puzzles discuss substantive questions, about form and matter, universal and particular, and the range of
substances (995b27–996a15).21 The substantive puzzles refer to the second feature of the projected universal science.
They are puzzles for rather than about a universal science. They show that we would like to ﬁnd such a science, because
we can raise difﬁcult puzzles that seem insoluble within any of the recognized sciences. The substantive puzzles
encourage us by their very existence to try to solve the methodological puzzles; and any acceptable solution of the
methodological puzzles must describe a science that can solve the substantive puzzles.

162

CHAPTER 8 § 88

88. Methodological Puzzles
The methodological puzzles arise naturally out of Aristotle's own claims about universal science. A puzzle arises from
apparently cogent arguments for apparently conﬂicting conclusions; and the apparent conﬂict emerges from a
comparison of Book i with Aristotle's earlier works. On the one hand, Book i suggests that we can describe a universal
science, and that it has useful work to do. On the other hand, the Organon suggests that there can be no such science.
We raise the negative side of the puzzle in so far as we treat the alleged universal science as a demonstrative science of
the sort described in the Posterior Analytics, and show that a universal science cannot match this demonstrative model.22
To resolve the puzzle we must either deny the possibility of a universal science or reject the demonstrative model.
Aristotle raises the methodological puzzles by suggesting that a universal science is impossible, because we can give no
satisfactory account of what it will study. If it studies the causes, it seems to conﬂict with the different special sciences
studying different causes (996a18–b1).23 If it studies substance, it can hardly be the science of the axioms as well; for it
should take the truth of the axioms for granted, as other sciences do, and should have no proprietary concern with
them (996b33–997a5).
It is hard to see how there can be a science of all substances as such0.24 Such a science would have to discuss both the
essence and the coincidents of substance; ‘the science of substance will also be some sort of demonstrative science, but
there seems to be no demonstration of the essence’ (997a30–2). Scientiﬁc knowledge concerns only the intrinsic
coincidents, and has to take for granted the substance and essence.25
If, on the other hand, universal science studies the axioms rather than substance, it must study them as the principles
of the genus it studies. But since the axioms are completely universal principles, the genus must consist of everything,
and the universal science must be the science of everything. In that case, there must be a universal genus consisting of
all beings, and the universal science must describe their coincidents (997a5–11).26 But we have good reasons for
denying that there is any such universal genus.
Though these puzzles most directly concern the object of the projected science, they indirectly concern its methods
too. For the difﬁculties arise if we think a universal science should meet Aristotle's criteria for a ﬁrst-order,
demonstrative science. These criteria, presented in the Analytics, require distinct demonstrative sciences, each with its
own proper area of appearances and its own undemonstrated assumptions. A universal, ﬁrst-order, demonstrative
science violates these criteria. As a ﬁrst-order science studying substances or causes in general,

CHAPTER 8 § 89

163

it preempts the special sciences studying subsets of substances or causes. As a demonstrative science studying the
axioms and the essence, it must seek to demonstrate truths that we know to be indemonstrable within a science, since
every demonstration must assume them.
Still, the result that the topics of universal science are not topics for scientiﬁc argument at all is unsatisfactory. Aristotle
asks: ‘If it is not the philosopher's task to study what is true and false about the axioms, who else has this task?’
(997a14–15). We are inclined to think these are questions deserving scientiﬁc study; and our inclination is more
reasonable if we can see why scientiﬁc argument need not be demonstrative.
Since the acceptance of the demonstrative model forced us into the difﬁculties, rejection of the model should release us
from them. But to raise this logical possibility of a non-demonstrative science is not to ﬁnd a solution to the puzzle; a
solution requires a convincing account of a type of argument that satisﬁes reasonable conditions for being scientiﬁc
without being demonstrative.
The extent of this difﬁculty is clearer if we consider an initially attractive answer to the puzzle about who studies the
axioms. The general, non-specialist character of the questions suggests that it might be the dialectician's task to study
them (cf. 1004b1–4). Aristotle agrees that dialectic studies the questions, but insists that it gives the wrong sorts of
answers. Universal science examines substance, same and different, like and unlike, contrary, prior and posterior, ‘and
all other things of this sort, all those about which the dialecticians try to examine, examining from the common beliefs
alone’ (995b22–4). Admittedly, dialectic seeks to argue that some claims are true and others false; its function is not
purely gymnastic or critical. But since it relies on the common beliefs alone, it cannot, in Aristotle's view, claim to know
the truth of its conclusions.
An appeal to dialectic neither removes doubts about a universal science nor shows that we can do without it. On the
one hand, dialectical method is a constructive, non-demonstrative form of argument for ﬁrst principles, and therefore
seems to be a plausible candidate for being the method of a universal science; on the other hand, it is conﬁned to
beliefs, and therefore seems an unlikely source of scientiﬁc argument.

89. Substantive Puzzles
The substantive puzzles raise speciﬁc questions about the nature of the ﬁrst principles, and about the claims of
different entities to be ﬁrst principles. Aristotle returns to the ﬁrst-order questions discussed in

164

CHAPTER 8 § 89

Book i, and now states them in more abstract terms, looking for the general assumptions underlying particular
theories.
Book i surveyed different views about the principles and causes of things. Some theorists think the principles are the
highest genera, the most general kinds; others prefer the primary constituents (998a20–b14).27 Some afﬁrm, and some
deny, that perishable substances have perishable causes (1000b20–1001a3).28 Some argue that the principles must be
universals that exist ‘beyond’ (para) particulars, since otherwise knowledge will be impossible (999a26–9); others claim
that knowledge requires principles to be numerically one (999b26–7). If we allow universals beyond particulars, we
must also allow genera beyond species, and this seems to be impossible (999a29–32; cf. a6–14). We seem to need
universals that are ‘beyond’, and therefore (so the puzzles assume) separated from, particulars, and from each other;
but we do not seem able to conceive them satisfactorily (999a14–22).29
Book i recognized form and matter as principles and causes, and the puzzles about universals and particulars seem to
apply to them also, since matter tends to be identiﬁed with the particular, and form with the universal (998b4–8). If we
believe in forms, apparently we must believe in the sorts of universals that raise the difﬁculties urged against Platonic
Forms. Aristotle asks if there is anything ‘beyond the compound’ (999a32–3), analysing the compound as matter with
something predicated (999a33–4). What is ‘beyond the compound’ seems to be a universal.
The puzzles about principles imply puzzles about substance, since substance is intended to be some sort of principle.30
The previous puzzles force us to ask how substance can be particular or universal, and how it can be form or matter.
We see some reason to identify substance with the particular, material, and perceptible, but also some reason to identify
it with the universal, formal, and intelligible. But now further puzzles arise. For we cannot see how universals can be
principles if they are not substances; we cannot see how universals are substances; we cannot see how anything except
universals is knowable; and we cannot see how principles are unknowable.
The different puzzles ask questions about principles, universals, particulars, form, matter, and substance, and take for
granted a conception of the thing they are asking about. Aristotle's survey of the substantive puzzles is meant to show
that the conception we take for granted may be wrong, and its wrongness may explain the puzzles. We have been
warned in Book i that ‘ﬁrst principle’ and ‘cause’ can be understood in different ways; there are four causes, and the
claims of matter and form to be causes are consistent if different types of causes are intended. But further inquiry
shows that we should not take for

CHAPTER 8 § 89

165

granted our initial beliefs about the nature of form and matter or universal and particular, any more than we should
take for granted our initial beliefs about causes. In asking which of these things are causes, we have to reckon with
possible errors in each of our initial conceptions.
The puzzles about universals show how different errors may be connected. The eighth thesis claims that if only
particulars exist, and there is nothing beyond them, there is no universal, and hence no knowledge (999a26–9); but we
cannot evaluate this claim until we know what it means to say that only particulars exist and there is nothing beyond
them. If the existence of particulars requires the existence of universals, then, in one sense, nothing ‘beyond’ particulars
is required for the existence of universals—we need not assume anything whose existence is not assumed in assuming
the existence of particulars. In another sense, however, we may say that the existence of particulars already ensures the
existence of something ‘beyond’ them—we cannot consistently assume that there are just particulars, and no
universals, once we see what particulars have to be (any more than we could assume that there are just slaves with no
masters). To evaluate the puzzle, we need to know the sense of ‘beyond’ that applies to the claim that things beyond
particulars are necessary for knowledge.31
The claim of form and matter to be principles depends on their relations to particular and universal and to substance.32
If forms must be universals, then questions about the reality of the formal cause must depend on the possibility of
universals that are substances (if principles and causes must be substances); but the issues will be quite different if all or
some forms are particulars.
Puzzles about substance arise in connexion with puzzles about ﬁrst principles, because we assume that ﬁrst principles
must be substances. But this assumption may be false or at least misleading. We assume that if universals are primary in
our knowledge, and therefore are ﬁrst principles, they must be substances. But perhaps only those things that are prior
in being need to be substances, and what is prior in knowledge need not be prior in being. In speaking of ﬁrst
principles Aristotle assumes some order; but he may not be speaking of the same order each time, and he may not
need the same things to come ﬁrst in each order. On the other hand, perhaps there is something wrong with the
conclusion that what is prior in being is not prior in knowledge. If knowledge is meant to grasp the objective order as it
really is, how can it involve a different order from the order of being?
If we are unsure about the exact signiﬁcance of these questions, let alone about the right answer to them, we are
foolish to accept the terms in which the puzzles are stated, and we only frustrate ourselves by premature attempts to
answer the puzzles. We are foolish if we rush to

166

CHAPTER 8 § 90

answer the questions raised in the puzzles without ﬁrst examining the more basic questions raised by the puzzles
themselves and by the terms in which they are formulated.

90. Puzzles and Preliminary Questions
These reﬂexions on the puzzles should modify our expectations about the structure of the Metaphysics. The puzzles
raise serious preliminary questions about the nature of principles, particulars, universals, form, matter, and substance;
and we would be wrong to try to answer the puzzles directly, without having ﬁrst answered the preliminary questions.
The rest of the Metaphysics may be an appropriate sequel to Book iii even if it does not explicitly answer all the puzzles;
we ought not to be surprised if Aristotle occupies himself at least as much with the preliminary questions as with the
puzzles that raise them.
The importance of the preliminary questions explains an initially surprising feature of the later books. The puzzles
seem to emphasize Platonic questions and questions about the super-sensible; but this emphasis is not present in all
the following books.33 Kant remarks that the problems about super-sensible reality, formulated in the Antinomies,
stimulated his interest in metaphysics, and shaped the formulation of his own doctrines.34 But his doctrines are not
concerned exclusively, or even primarily, with claims to knowledge of super-sensible reality. Rather, such claims to
knowledge suggest to Kant the more general preliminary questions that need further discussion; and the answers to
these preliminary questions show us the right approach to the problems about super-sensible knowledge.
The similar structure of Aristotle's puzzles and of Kant's Antinomies is striking; and the similarity between their views
is still deeper. Aristotle sees, as Kant sees, that some ﬁrst-order questions rest on preliminary assumptions needing
more scrutiny than they usually receive. And he agrees with Kant in thinking that failure to understand the preliminary
questions, as they apply to ordinary, familiar, sensible reality, is the source of errors in claims about non-sensible reality.
Much of the Metaphysics is devoted, as is much of Kant's Critique, to the discussion of preliminary questions that overeager theorists have neglected in their premature efforts to defend the thesis or the antithesis of each puzzle. Attention
to sensible substance does not imply that Aristotle forgets the puzzles, or that he changes the plan of the Metaphysics.
On the contrary, the difﬁculty and importance of the preliminary questions shows why it would be wrong to approach
the puzzles directly.

CHAPTER 8 § 90

167

By identifying and examining the preliminary questions, Aristotle hopes to challenge the sceptical version of the history
of philosophy. The exposition of the puzzles seems to present evidence in favour of scepticism. The sceptical historian
of philosophy might well offer these numerous unsolved puzzles as reasons for thinking that scientiﬁc and
philosophical inquiry is nothing more than a sequence of undecidable disputes. Indeed we noticed that Descartes takes
the existence of unsettled disagreements to be a reason for thinking we cannot make philosophical progress by
studying the views and arguments of previous philosophers.35
Aristotle acknowledges this argument for scepticism, as Kant acknowledges the apparently interminable and insoluble
character of disputes in metaphysics. But Kant sees a way out, in a different approach to the preliminary questions:
Thus the critique of reason, in the end, necessarily leads to scientiﬁc knowledge; while its dogmatic employment, on
the other hand, lands us in dogmatic assertions to which other assertions, equally specious, can always be
opposed—that is in scepticism.36
Aristotle, similarly, thinks the case for scepticism can be answered. He intends to show that the disputes seem insoluble
only because we have not studied the preliminary questions they raise, or because we have not realized that these
questions can be answered by scientiﬁc argument. To expose the preliminary questions is only to conﬁrm sceptical
doubts, if we cannot see how to answer the questions scientiﬁcally; but Aristotle projects a universal science that will
answer them.
The substantive puzzles, therefore, suggest why we need the second-order science that raised the methodological
puzzles, and why we ought to keep looking for such a science. For the preliminary questions raised by the substantive
puzzles seem to need Aristotle's universal science, ‘the science we are looking for’, to answer them. The universal
science is supposed to discuss ﬁrst principles; since substance is a ﬁrst principle, it will discuss substance; since there
are questions about the nature of particulars and universals and of matter and form, and about their relations to
substance, it will discuss all these questions.
We are not likely to ﬁnd the sort of answer we want in a demonstrative, departmental science. For every such science
begins by assuming an account of principles, causes, and so on, and it is not the task of the science itself to defend such
assumptions. And yet the puzzles show us that our assumptions on these questions may need to be reexamined. This
task of reexamination would rightly be assigned to dialectic, which is expected precisely to examine the assumptions
that a departmental science has to take for granted (Top. 101a36–b4)—if

168

CHAPTER 8 § 91

dialectic could be expected to yield knowledge. Since dialectic cannot yield knowledge, we are still looking for the
science we need.37

91. The Possibility of a Universal Science
Aristotle often begins his solution of dialectical puzzles, not by a frontal attack on the conﬂicting arguments, but by
‘making a new start’, appealing to some assumption that has not been called into question even by the most thorough
survey of the puzzles.38 The choice of a new start determines the status of the solution. If the new start is an
assumption that is generally accepted, but could easily be rejected, then the solution is purely dialectical; it relies
essentially on the actual agreement of particular interlocutors. But if the new start is also difﬁcult to reject, then it
depends less on the fact of agreement. What makes an assumption easy or difﬁcult to reject must still be discussed.
If Aristotle makes the right sort of new start in Book iv, he should describe a conception of the universal science that is
not undermined by the objections raised in Book iii. The objections challenge the possibility of a ﬁrst-order
demonstrative universal science of ﬁrst principles; and within Aristotle's conception of a science, they are quite
powerful. He needs a conception of a science that both avoids the objections and is clearly a plausible conception of a
science rather than of some other discipline.
In the ﬁrst chapter of Book iv Aristotle sketches his answer to these questions:
(a) There is a science that studies being qua being and its intrinsic properties. (b) This is not the same as any of the
sciences called departmental (or ‘special’, en merei). For none of the other sciences examines universally about being
qua being, but each cuts off a part of it 〈sc. being〉, and about this part studies what coincides, as the
mathematical sciences do. (c) Since we are seeking the origins and the highest causes, clearly they must be 〈the
causes〉 of some nature in itself. (d) If, then, those who were seeking the elements of beings were also seeking these
〈highest〉 origins, it is necessary also for 〈the elements〉 to be the elements of being not coincidentally but qua
being. Hence we too should ﬁnd the ﬁrst causes of being qua being. (1003a21–32)
In (a) Aristotle describes the subject-matter of the science, in terms not used in Book iii. Since he avoids any of the
descriptions that raised the ﬁrst puzzles in iii, the projected science does not evidently collapse in the face of objections
to a universal science.
Still, it is clearly meant to fall within the intended scope of these objections, since it is meant to be a universal science. It
is ‘the science we are looking for’, the same one that was sought in Book i and raised the

CHAPTER 8 § 91

169

puzzles in Book iii. In (c) Aristotle afﬁrms that he still wants a universal science that will study the most ultimate causes
(1003a26–8).39 In (d) he agrees with those who were seeking the elements of beings (986a2, 992b18; cf. 1071a29), and
assumes they were right in looking for something as general as the elements of being; he simply adds that the inquiry
must be about being in itself, in so far as it is being.40 A science that claims to study the elements of being raises puzzles
about its subject-matter; but Aristotle implies that when we add ‘qua being’ to the description, we can avoid
the puzzles.
To see why the addition of ‘qua being’ solves the puzzles, we need to see what Aristotle means by claiming that the
special sciences do not study being qua being, that none the less they study being, and that the universal science studies
being qua being.
A special science, according to (b), cuts off a bit of being and studies its coincidents (cf. 1025b3–13). This ‘cutting off ’
is not simply isolating a class of things to study. Someone who studies diseases of animals with hearts must consider all
and only the animals with livers, if the two classes have the same members; but the properties she studies are those
explained by having a heart, not by having a liver. The cardiologist, therefore, ‘cuts off ’ creatures with hearts, not
creatures with livers (which are cut off by a hepatologist), and studies them qua having hearts, not qua having livers.
As usual, Aristotle uses the ‘qua’ to distinguish the referentially transparent place preceding it from the referentially
opaque place following it. The science of being studies not primarily a distinct class of objects, but a distinct property
of objects. Just as nothing prevents the cardiologist and the hepatologist from studying the same animals, nothing
prevents the student of being from studying different properties of the very things that the mathematician or
astronomer or natural scientist studies (1004b5–8).41
This explanation of ‘being qua being’ answers those puzzles that seemed to make the universal science a rival to the
special sciences. No rivalry results even if it studies the same beings that are studied by a special science, unless it also
studies them qua the same things—unless, in other words, it studies the same properties of the same beings. But it
does not study the same properties; the universal science is the science of being qua being, mathematics is the science
of some beings qua mathematical objects and physics is the science of some beings qua changeable.42 The science of
being studies the same things that are studied by other sciences, but studies different properties of them, discovering
these properties by a different level of abstraction. But it does not create the properties by abstraction; it discovers
properties for scientiﬁc study that others have not explicitly recognized, even if they have implicitly discussed them
(1005a23–b2).43

170

CHAPTER 8 § 92

92. The Object of Universal Science
So far we see why ‘qua being’ prevents competition between the universal science and special sciences; but we still want
to see why it marks off a legitimate area of study for the universal science. The answer depends on the claim that a
special science cuts off a part of being.
A special science assumes that it begins with a subject that has properties; for it has to distinguish the essential
properties, which it takes for granted, from the intrinsic coincidents, which it studies. It does not ask what something
must be like to be a subject with essential and coincidental properties, or why we should believe there are any such
subjects. Equally, a science must assume that we have some grasp of how things objectively are, not just of how they
seem. For it assumes we have intuitive understanding of ﬁrst principles, and this intuition is the basis of claims to
demonstrate the derived truths about the intrinsic coincidents.
A particular discipline counts as a science only if these assumptions are true; if they are true, it has successfully cut off a
part of being. But no demonstrative science demonstrates that it has itself cut off a part of being. It does not ask how
things must be if objective truths about them are to be possible, or whether any things satisfy the appropriate
conditions.44
The universal science, by contrast, studies being qua being, because it studies those properties of the objects of special
sciences that the special sciences themselves must assume. It asks how something must be if it is really and objectively
a subject with essential and coincidental properties, and asks whether anything meets the conditions that we discover.
The special sciences do not seek, but assume, answers to these questions; a science of being is needed to ﬁnd and to
justify the answers. The science of being qua being is equally the science of the object of science qua object of science.
Aristotle asks the Kantian question, ‘How is science possible?’, by asking how things must be if there is scientiﬁc
knowledge of them. He asks the question about the necessary features of the object known, not primarily of the
knowing subject, and so does not express the question in Kant's primarily epistemological terms: ‘What must we
believe, and on what grounds, if we have scientiﬁc knowledge?’ But the parallels are suggestive, and the differences
may be less deep than they seem.
The right conception of being qua being explains why the science that studies being qua being must study substance;
contrary to the suggestion in the puzzles, these are not two different areas of study for the universal science.

CHAPTER 8 § 92

171

It is clear, then, that it is also a task for one science to study beings qua beings. And in every case a science is strictly
and properly (kuriôs) concerned with what is primary 〈in its genus〉—the thing on which the others depend and
because of which they are called what they are. If, then, this 〈primary thing〉 is substance, the philosopher ought
to grasp the principles and causes of substance. (1003b15–19)
The universal science is the science of being because it studies the sort of being that is presupposed by the possibility
of the other sciences; and it is primarily the science of substance because substance is the primary sort of being, and all
other beings are focally connected to it.45 Each being is to be deﬁned either as a substance or as something dependent
on a substance as its ﬁrst principle (pros mian archên, 1003b6).46
The study of being qua being, the sort of being presupposed by the special sciences, requires the study of substance,
since the sciences assume that they are studying a subject with essential properties.47 The science of being asks both
what sort of subject is required, and whether there are any such subjects. The discussion of the Presocratics suggests,
and Books iv and vii show in detail, that this inquiry into subjects and essences is precisely an inquiry into substance. In
studying the nature of substance and the beings dependent on it, the science of being should both explain and justify
the assumption made by a special science.
The primacy of substance is actually supposed to explain the special way in which the science of being is a universal
science. Aristotle claims for the philosopher the task of studying general ‘logical’ questions about whether Socrates is
the same as Socrates seated, whether one thing has only one contrary, and so on. The concern of ﬁrst philosophy with
these questions is its ground for claiming to study everything (1004a31–b4).48 But it studies them in their connexion
with substance: ‘Those who examine these questions are not in error in the sense of not doing philosophy, but because
substance is prior, and they have not heard of it’ (1004b8–10). To fail to study beings in their connexion with substance
is to fail to study being qua being; and in studying the connexion with substance we discover the sort of being that is
presupposed by the special sciences.
This relation between the science of being and the special sciences justiﬁes Aristotle in calling the universal science ‘ﬁrst
philosophy’, since it examines basic principles that are presupposed by special sciences.49 It equally deserves its other
name ‘metaphysics’, since it is the product of second-order reﬂexion on the study of nature. In connecting the study of
substance with the study of being qua being, Aristotle dispels the suspicion that a science of substance will rival special
sciences of different kinds of substances. It is a second-order inquiry into substance, asking what substance must be
like if there is to be a subject for

172

CHAPTER 8 § 93

any ﬁrst-order science; it examines the conception of substance that a ﬁrst-order science must assume if it seeks to tell
us anything about the substances it recognizes. To say that the science of being qua being is a second-order science is
not to imply that it is concerned more with what is said about the world than about the world itself; it is concerned
with the world in a particular abstract way, asking what things have to be like to be subjects for sciences.50

93. The Universal Science Contrasted With Demonstrative Science
Aristotle has now answered the puzzles about the subject-matter of the universal science; by arguing that the universal
science studies being qua being, he has shown why it does not compete with the special sciences. He has still not
explained, though, how it can be a science, since he has not yet answered the puzzles that cast doubt on the possibility
of a universal demonstrative science of the most ultimate principles. He must show either that the science of being will,
despite appearances, be demonstrative, or that it will somehow be both non-demonstrative and scientiﬁc.
Aristotle denies himself the ﬁrst answer, since he implies that the science of being cannot be demonstrative. He has
pointed out in Book iii that a demonstrative science must deﬁne a distinct genus for itself. The science must assume its
ﬁrst principles, without proving them within the science; in particular it must ‘assume the essence’ taking for granted a
conception of the subject whose coincidents are demonstrated. If a universal and second-order science, with the scope
we have assigned to the science of being, had to rely on such assumptions, its method would be self-defeating. It has
no distinct genus of the right sort.51 Nor can it assume the essence. In trying to demonstrate from assumptions it would
be taking for granted a conception of the ﬁrst principles; but what a science is ‘of ’ is not the essence it assumes, but the
intrinsic coincidents it demonstrates; and so if the science of being has to assume some ﬁrst principles, it will be the
science of the properties demonstrated from these principles, not the science of the principles themselves.
Aristotle, therefore, contrasts the method of the science of being with the method of the special sciences.
They do not concern themselves with being unconditionally or in so far as it is being. Nor do they give any
argument about the essence; but some make it clear by perception, others take it as an assumption, and from this
demonstrate with more or less necessity the intrinsic attributes of the genus that concern them. Hence it is clear
from this survey of examples that there is no demonstration of substance or of essence, but some other way of
making it clear. (1025b9–16)52

CHAPTER 8 § 93

173

The whole point of the science of being is to be the science of the absolutely ﬁrst principles, and therefore to study their
nature; it must justify, not take for granted, a conception of the ﬁrst principles. The method of demonstration seems
just the wrong one for the tasks assigned to this science.
This objection to a demonstrative science of being does not rest on any doubts about Aristotle's conception of a
demonstrative science. We have argued that in fact such doubts are perfectly justiﬁed, and that Aristotle's appeal to
intuitive nous to explain how we grasp ﬁrst principles is a bad solution to the difﬁculties raised by his own view on
demonstration. We will be justiﬁably pleased, then, if the conception of ﬁrst philosophy as a science does not rely on
the doctrine of nous to explain how this science grasps the ﬁrst principles. But even if we completely accepted the
doctrine of nous, we could not invoke it to understand ﬁrst philosophy. For any science that relies on intuition of ﬁrst
principles is not the science of those principles, and does not argue for them; the principles must be prior to the
arguments of the science. If we knew that a science relied on intuition of such principles, we would know that this
science could not be ﬁrst philosophy; for the principles assumed would be prior to the truths that the science is of, and
so the science would not be the science of the ultimately ﬁrst principles.
First philosophy is the science of the ultimately ﬁrst principles, including the axioms, which cannot be demonstrated
from prior principles.53 It is concerned with the axioms, just as it is concerned with substance and essence, because it is
concerned with being qua being. The special sciences differ from the science of being in taking the essence for granted,
and in taking the axioms for granted (1005a23–9). The science of being, therefore, must argue that the axioms are true
(1005a29–b2), and not simply take them for granted; and since they are ﬁrst principles, it cannot demonstrate them. If,
then, ﬁrst philosophy is to fulﬁl its task, it cannot be demonstrative.54
It does not follow, however, that some other method is the right one for ﬁrst philosophy; for the tasks assigned to it
may be impossible. If it is required to argue for ﬁrst principles without assuming ﬁrst principles, what can it argue
from?
This question does not simply reﬂect a peculiarity of Aristotle's conception of demonstrative knowledge; it arises from
a more general question about justiﬁcation of ﬁrst principles. Aristotle claimed in the Analytics that ﬁrst principles of
demonstration had to be grasped by intuition, because he rejected both inﬁnite regresses and circular arguments as
sources of justiﬁcation. In putting forward a science of the ultimate principles, with the task of justifying the principles
that cannot be derived from a higher science, he seems to ignore his own views about justiﬁcation.

174

CHAPTER 8 § 94

94. The Universal Science Contrasted With Dialectic
Aristotle's only method of argument about the principles taken for granted in demonstrative science is dialectical; and
so it is reasonable to expect that the method of universal science will be in some way dialectical. We have further
reason for thinking so when we see that the second-order questions about substance, particulars, universals, and so on
are the topics of Aristotle's dialectical works, both logical and physical.55
On the other hand, Aristotle has warned against attempting to solve the puzzles by identifying the universal science
with dialectic; for he insisted in Book iii that the dialectician examines questions from the common beliefs alone
(995b22–4), and therefore cannot make the claim to objective truth that we expect from scientiﬁc argument. Book iv
still accepts this contrast between dialectic and science on the crucial point: ‘dialectic tests in the area where philosophy
comes to know’ (1004b25–6).56
This contrast suggests that philosophy studies being in so far as it is being, and dialectic studies being in so far as it is
commonly believed to be.57 To reach conclusions about being in so far as it is being, we must be justiﬁed in believing
conclusions saying that this is how things really and objectively are. A science assumes that we are justiﬁed in believing
this, since it assumes that it has ‘cut off a part of being’ as its object of study. Since the universal science takes being qua
being to be its object of study, it must equally claim objective truth for its conclusions; and if we think there is a science
of being, we must think we are justiﬁed in believing conclusions claiming objective truth.
Ordinary dialectic makes no such claim for its conclusions; it seeks to give a coherent account of the common beliefs,
but makes no further claim about the status of its conclusions. The fact that we have reached a conclusion by ordinary
dialectical argument gives us no sufﬁcient reason for claiming objective truth for the conclusion. This weakness of
ordinary dialectic requires the view of its role that Aristotle suggests in Physics i. On that view, dialectical argument does
not seek to prove the truth of a principle, since it only argues from common beliefs, and need not prove the truth of
principles that are certain and self-evident. Dialectic need only remove the puzzles and confusions that prevent us
from seeing that the principle is self-evident.58 This limitation on dialectic, if consistently observed, requires very
dubious claims about intuition; we must be able, for instance, to see that the particular part of the doctrine of the
categories needed for mathematics or natural science is self-evidently true, not simply the result of logical dialectic.
Aristotle does not in fact regularly advert to this limitation on his

CHAPTER 8 § 95

175

dialectical conclusions. He speaks as though his arguments about the categories, substance, form and matter, and
causes supported claims to have found objective ﬁrst principles. But his account of dialectical method suggests that he
ought not to suggest this, and the contrast drawn in Metaphysics iv between dialectic and philosophy suggests that he
sees this very difﬁculty.59
It seems, then, that dialectical method is the only method that Aristotle has to offer for defending ﬁrst principles, and
that dialectic, as he normally conceives it, cannot give the sort of defence he wants.60 We can resolve this puzzle if we
suppose that ﬁrst philosophy practises some type of dialectical argument, but a type that differs from ordinary dialectic.
Let us call this special type of dialectic strong dialectic, recognizing that so far it is, as Aristotle says about universal
science, a method ‘we are looking for’, and not assuming that there really is any such thing.

95. The Dialectical Character of Universal Science
To see whether there is such a thing as strong dialectic, we should see how it will have to modify ordinary dialectic if it
is to achieve the results that Aristotle expects in ﬁrst philosophy.
We can see the modiﬁcation that is needed, if we see the source of the weakness of ordinary dialectical conclusions.
The conclusions tell us only about common beliefs, because premisses are admissible as long as they express (or are
suitably connected with) common beliefs.61 Since the dialectician is relatively undemanding in her choice of premisses,
she cannot expect the conclusions to meet any more demanding standards. It may now occur to us that we could
perhaps ﬁnd conclusions with a better claim to objective truth if we were more selective about the premisses.
Apparently we need to select from the subset of common beliefs that we have reason to regard as suitable premisses
for the right sort of conclusion. If we can ﬁnd the right subset, then the prospects of strong dialectic may be more
encouraging.
This argument may seem to get us no further forward. For how can we ﬁnd suitable premisses for an argument to ﬁrst
principles without relying on some further ﬁrst principles, so that our original ﬁrst principles were not ﬁrst after all, and
we face an inﬁnite regress? If, alternatively, we appeal to the principles that we are supposed to be arguing for, we seem
to face a vicious circle. We seem unable to select the appropriate subset of common beliefs unless we have already
found principles that would make the selection unnecessary.
Such objections should not immediately discourage us. For we may

176

CHAPTER 8 § 95

have some views about which of the admitted common beliefs are reliable; and these views do not necessarily depend
on our having a deﬁnite view about ﬁrst principles. It is true that these views themselves may be matters of common
belief, so that ultimately we are appealing to common beliefs; but we are appealing to a further level of common beliefs
that may be more selective than our ﬁrst-order common beliefs are.
We have not yet given any reason for thinking that any of our views about which common beliefs are especially reliable
are themselves especially reliable. But if we can ﬁnd some reasons for trusting our judgments about the reliability of
some common beliefs, and if our dialectical arguments conﬁne themselves to the subset of common beliefs that are
judged reliable, then these arguments will give us more reason than we have in ordinary dialectic to believe in the
objective truth of our conclusion. If we can give arguments of this sort, we will give the sort of argument needed for
strong dialectic. If Aristotle intends to offer arguments of this sort, then he is not evidently wrong to claim that ﬁrst
philosophy can be both dialectical and scientiﬁc; for he can at least state a coherent conception of strong dialectic that
satisﬁes the appropriate conditions.
He suggests that dialecticians fail to argue scientiﬁcally because ‘they have not heard’ of substance (1004b8–10), and do
not consider being qua being. He cannot mean that they have no concept of substance; he probably means that they
have not heard of its role in the study of being qua being. To consider being qua being is to examine the
presuppositions of the special sciences; and Aristotle implies that such an examination will result in arguments that are
not purely dialectical.
The assumption that there is something for scientiﬁc study is not just a common belief. While many widely shared
beliefs could be given up without serious damage to our other beliefs, this belief is quite fundamental, and could not be
given up without serious loss. Since we have good reason for thinking this belief is true, we have reason for claiming
that dialectical arguments founded on it are not purely dialectical. The belief may indeed be challenged; but we may see
that the results of challenging it are more incredible than any of the assumptions underlying the challenge could be. In
iv 4–5 Aristotle seeks to show this about the ﬁrst principles and challenges to them.
Strong dialectic follows the normal dialectical policy of ‘making a new start’, from premisses that have not been
challenged by the puzzles. But, as we noticed, different types of new start introduce different types of dialectical
argument. The arguments of ﬁrst philosophy belong to strong dialectic, in so far as they rely on a new start that is not
simply a matter of general agreement. The assumption that there is such a thing

CHAPTER 8 § 96

177

as being qua being is a presupposition of any scientiﬁc study of an objective world at all (even if we do not realize that
we are committed to recognizing such a thing as being qua being); and if our new start rests on this assumption, it does
not simply argue from common beliefs. Aristotle's account of dialectic and of the starting-point of ﬁrst philosophy
makes it reasonable for him to claim that the method of ﬁrst philosophy is both dialectical and scientiﬁc.

96. The Task of the Universal Science
These arguments are not meant to prove that Aristotle's conception of ﬁrst philosophy is reasonable. It may indeed be
unreasonable, if he has no plausible way of isolating the reliable subset of common beliefs. All I have argued is that it is
not evidently unreasonable, as we might well have supposed if we examined his views on dialectical and on scientiﬁc
method. To see whether any arguments meet the conditions Aristotle imposes on the arguments of ﬁrst philosophy, we
should examine some of the arguments he actually offers.
We will perhaps be able to focus the issues more clearly if we examine some of the arguments in the Metaphysics for
conclusions about substance that are defended by purely dialectical argument in the Organon and the physical works.
Since these earlier works rely on the sorts of premisses that satisfy us in ordinary dialectical argument, their basic
ontological scheme claims to reﬂect common beliefs. We may quite fairly ask why that makes the scheme true, and
especially why the Aristotelian scheme is more likely than any less intuitive Platonic or Democritean scheme to be true.
Aristotle himself sees this limitation in dialectical argument; that is why he says it proceeds according to belief and not
according to truth. This is the unsatisfactory position that he tries to escape in the Metaphysics. He wants to show that
ontology can rest on a scientiﬁc, though not a demonstrative, foundation, because its claims about beings rest on
requirements for being, not merely on common beliefs.
From Aristotle's claims about universal science we have found that he recognizes a second-order science whose
arguments will be both dialectical and scientiﬁc, and which will argue for its ﬁrst principles. In recognizing such a
science he commits himself to acceptance of some important aspects of Plato's account of dialectic.62 He also changes
his mind about philosophy, both in his sense and in the modern sense of the term.
Both in Plato and in Aristotle, the method of dialectic has the best claim to be characteristic of what we call philosophy.
But whereas for

178

CHAPTER 8 § 96

Plato dialectic deserves the honoriﬁc title of ‘philosophy’, for Aristotle in the Organon it does not. There he agrees with
Plato in thinking that ‘philosophy’ in the honoriﬁc sense should be a science—objective, provable truth about a reality
independent of the subject's own beliefs or preferences—but he thinks dialectic cannot claim this status for its results.63
His reasons are plausible and fairly familiar reasons for doubts about the claims of philosophical argument. Philosophy,
as we understand it, seems to begin from common sense and to argue from what seems obvious, or what we would all
say, or what we intuitively believe, to reach conclusions about the nature of reality. The resources seem inadequate to
yield the desired results; and philosophers as well as non-philosophers have been sceptical about the claims.
In the Organon Aristotle, as we have seen, admits these limitations on dialectic, but does not face all the consequences.
Though he distinguishes the conclusions of dialectic from the results of scientiﬁc argument, he accepts them as an
account of how things are. He does not suggest that the ontology of the Categories simply expresses ordinary beliefs and
common sense, or that it may need to be revised or abandoned if we come to know more about the world. Indeed, he
rejects rather brusquely the revisions proposed by Platonists and Atomists, as well as the more radical objections urged
by Eleatics.
He seems to have more conﬁdence in dialectic than is warranted by his own views about its capacities. We might think
it tells us about appearances—how things seem to common sense, rather than how they are; and we will be content
with appearances only if we hold the Protagorean position, which Aristotle rejects no less ﬁrmly than he rejects
extensive revisions of common sense. The status of dialectic expresses most sharply the distance between what
Aristotle is entitled to and what he achieves.
The Metaphysics suggests that Aristotle sees these difﬁculties and tries to solve them. He faces Presocratic and Platonic
ontologies; he distinguishes the arguments of universal science from those of ordinary dialectic, suggesting that they
will rely on strong dialectic; and he attacks Protagoras. Each of these features of the Metaphysics reﬂects a difference
from the earlier works; and together they show how Aristotle might remove our doubts about his position.

9 The Science of Being
97. Arguments of Universal Science
One of the puzzles in Book iii asked whether and why the science that studies the axioms will also study substance, and
which study will be prior to which (Met. 996b26–997a15). The common axioms were not mentioned as the source of
any of the substantive puzzles in Book iii. But precisely for this reason they provide a useful test for the science of
being. In the case of the substantive puzzles we do not antecedently agree on the conclusion that we expect a science of
being to reach (about whether, e.g., particulars or universals are substances); and so we cannot use the conclusions
reached by the putative science as a test of its method.
Everyone agrees, however, that the axioms are true, and everyone uses them; and so we agree about what we expect a
science of the axioms to prove. We may be doubtful about the prospects of a science of the axioms for a quite different
reason; they seem so fundamental that we cannot easily see the premisses from which we could reasonably claim to
prove them. It is not initially clear what the universal science will show about the axioms if it expects to argue about
them.
Aristotle answers that the universal science must study both substance and the axioms, precisely because it studies
being qua being (1005a19–b8). A defence of the axioms should show us what it is like to argue about being qua being,
and in particular whether such argument is a scientiﬁc way to argue about ﬁrst principles that are too fundamental to
admit demonstration. If we are convinced on this point, we will perhaps see how an argument about being qua being
might be applied to the more contentious preliminary questions raised by the substantive puzzles.
In studying being qua being the universal science studies the sort of thing that the special sciences take for granted—a
subject with essential properties, whose intrinsic coincidents are studied by the special sciences. In studying substance
the universal science explains why a science must presuppose this sort of subject, why the presupposition is justiﬁed,
and what the subject must be like. The ﬁrst step in this study is to show that the subject must satisfy the axioms; since
these are the most general truths about being qua being, and ‘qua being’ implies ‘qua the

180

CHAPTER 9 § 97

sort of subject that a science must presuppose’, Aristotle wants to show ﬁrst philosophy can argue for the truth of the
axioms. He concentrates on the Principle of Non-Contradiction (PNC), arguing that the principle must be true for
some of the properties of any subject.1
The defence of PNC is a test for the method of ﬁrst philosophy. For Aristotle admits, indeed insists, that PNC cannot
be demonstrated (1006a5–11).
Now some people actually demand that we demonstrate this also. They do this from lack of education; for we show
our lack of education if we do not know what we should, and what we should not, seek to have demonstrated. For
in general it is impossible to have everything demonstrated, since there would be an inﬁnite regress, and so even
then there would be no demonstration; there are some things, then, of which we must not seek a demonstration. In
that case, they could not say what principle they would think had a better claim than this one 〈PNC〉 has to be
left undemonstrated. (1006a5–11; cf. 1005b2–5)
He cannot claim, therefore, that the ﬁrst philosopher's special competence consists in demonstrating PNC. On the
other hand he has claimed some special competence for ﬁrst philosophy, in contrast to the special sciences, none of
which ‘undertakes to say anything about them 〈sc. the axioms〉, whether they are true or not’ (1005a29–30). First
philosophy should undertake this task that the other sciences avoid. It cannot discharge the task by offering a merely
dialectical argument; for, unlike dialectic, it seeks knowledge of the truth, not simply a coherent account of common
beliefs.
Aristotle ought, therefore, to offer an argument that is neither demonstrative nor purely dialectical.2 And in fact he
claims to offer a ‘demonstration by refutation’:
But still, it is possible to demonstrate by refutation even that 〈the denial of PNC〉 is impossible, if only the
disputant speaks of something. If he speaks of nothing, it is ridiculous to look for a rational discourse (logos) with
someone who has rational discourse about nothing, in so far as he does not have it; for in so far as he lacks rational
discourse, such a person makes himself like a vegetable. (1006a11–15; cf. 1008b10–12)
It is plain that this ‘demonstration by refutation’ is not demonstrative in the usual way, and fairly plain that its method
is to some degree dialectical, since it begins with something conceded by the interlocutor. Still, if it belongs to a science,
it ought not to be purely dialectical; for Aristotle claims that philosophy acquires knowledge in the area of being qua
being, whereas dialectic is purely peirastic in this area. To see if Aristotle can fairly claim the status that he needs for the
argument, we must examine its strategy more closely.

CHAPTER 9 § 98

181

98. The Defence of the Principle of Non-Contradiction
Aristotle considers an opponent (O) who claims that for any subject and for any of its properties it is possible for that
subject to have both the property and its negation. Aristotle wants to show that O is committed to the denial of this
thesis. This is an argument about being qua being, since Aristotle and O are arguing about something that the special
sciences presuppose. To show what a science must presuppose, we should try to reject a given alleged presupposition,
and see if we still have an object of scientiﬁc study. O and Aristotle agree that scientiﬁc study presupposes a subject
with properties, but O denies that it presupposes a subject satisfying PNC. To show that O is wrong, Aristotle seeks to
show that O has no object of study left if O refuses to presuppose PNC.
Now the starting-point for all such things is not a demand for 〈the respondent〉 to say that something either is or
is not 〈and not both〉—for someone might perhaps suppose that this would be begging the question; it is a
demand for him to signify something both to himself and to another. For he must do this if he speaks of something,
since otherwise he has no rational discourse either with himself or with another. If he grants this, there will be a
demonstration 〈by refutation〉, since something will be deﬁnite as soon as he grants this. (1006a18–25)
Aristotle argues from what O himself must presuppose. First he leads O to agree that O cannot state his position
unless he and we agree on these points:
1. O signiﬁes something, some subject S to which he ascribes the properties F and not-F.
2. F and not-F are contradictory, and therefore non-identical, properties; for if they were the same property, O's
thesis would be a trivial truth different from the proposition O means to assert.
3. It is the same subject S that O signiﬁes as the subject of both properties.3
Aristotle wants to argue that if O's thesis is true, then its presuppositions are true; if they are true, then O's thesis is
false; hence if it is true it is false; hence it is false.4
Aristotle assumes that O signiﬁes a subject, man, and he asks O what the name ‘man’ signiﬁes. We agree that it signiﬁes
biped animal, and we will say that this is being a man: ‘By “signifying one thing” I mean this; if man is this, then if
anything is man, this will be being man’ (1006a32–4). The subject that is signiﬁed is man, and being man is being the
subject it is.5
To see the importance of this move we may consider it for

182

CHAPTER 9 § 98

contradictory predicates at different times. If I say, e.g., that a man was fat at t1 and is not fat at t2, I say it about the
same subject, the man; though he has lost his property of being fat, he must retain whatever property is necessary for
his being the same subject. If this is so, he must have some other property besides being fat and besides being not-fat.
We need not commit ourselves to any strong doctrine of essential properties here; we need not say that there is one
property that must persist in all change, or that the property can be described in purely qualitative terms; perhaps some
primitive ostension or unanalysable temporal continuity is all that is needed. But whatever this property is, the subject
must have it throughout the change; hence it cannot have only properties that it loses in the change. If it lost all its
properties, it would go out of existence; two different subjects would exist, and no change would be ascribed to a single
subject. A single subject undergoing change cannot have simply the property it loses, but must also have the essential
property that makes it the same subject.
When O denies the Principle of Non-Contradiction, he wants to ascribe contradictory properties to the same subject at
the same time, not at different times. But the point that held for change must hold here too; the subject must have
whatever property makes it the same subject when the two contradictory properties are predicated of it. Aristotle
properly insists that O must signify a single subject.6 When O says ‘Man is F and not F’, his thesis can be expanded into
‘Man is F and man is not F’; and if O is to present the thesis he intends to, he must signify the same subject in both
occurrences of ‘man’.
The subject signiﬁed in each occurrence, then, must satisfy the conditions necessary for it to be the same subject as the
one signiﬁed in the other occurrence; and therefore the subject signiﬁed on each occasion must have the same essential
properties. In signifying the same subject, therefore, O must signify the same essential property.7 Let us suppose that
the essential property of man is F (in Aristotle's argument it is biped animal), the very property that O both afﬁrms and
denies of man. This is a fair assumption, since O's denial of PNC is meant to apply to every property of the subject.
We have so far clariﬁed O's thesis, and seen why it presupposes the same subject with the same essential property. We
have therefore defended Aristotle's claim that O's thesis presupposes the ﬁrst and the third of the presuppositions
mentioned above. We now need to understand the second presupposition. O asserts that man is both F and not F,
where ‘F’ refers to the property signiﬁed by ‘man’, the essential property of man; and Aristotle insists that ‘F’ and ‘not
F’, as they occur in O's thesis, must signify different properties. He claims: ‘It is not possible, then, for being man to
signify essentially not being man, if

CHAPTER 9 § 99

183

“man” signiﬁes not only of one 〈subject〉 but also one thing ‘(1006b13–15).8 To see Aristotle's point we may
suppose that ‘man’ and ‘not man’ signify the same things, so that F (signiﬁed by ‘man’) and not F (signiﬁed by ‘not
man’) are the same property (1006b22–5). If they are the same, then O's assertion ‘Man is F and not F’ ascribes the
same property twice to the same subject. But this is not what O intended to do. To maintain his original thesis he must
maintain that being man is different from not being man.
We have now examined the three presuppositions of O's thesis, and found that it commits him to claiming that he
signiﬁes man, that F is what man is, and that F is different from not-F. We can add up O's presuppositions, and see
that they cannot be consistently combined. (1) To deny every instance of PNC, O must say it is possible for the same
subject, man, to have the contradictory of each of its properties. (2) If O is speaking of the same subject, he must
acknowledge that he signiﬁes the essence, the property that makes the subject of two predications the same subject. (3)
Hence, since the subject man is essentially F, a subject that is not F is not the same subject as the one signiﬁed by the
ﬁrst occurrence of ‘man’. (4) Hence when O says that man is not F, O is committed to denying that this subject (the
one that is not F) is the same subject that as the one that he said is F, since being F is the essential property of man.
Though O wanted both to assert and deny the same property of the same subject, he has failed to do this.9 He has to
deny the presuppositions of his own position. For he has presupposed that he can signify the same subject; but the
conditions for doing this turn out to be inconsistent with rejecting PNC for the essential property that must be
signiﬁed in signifying the same subject. If O cannot signify the same subject, he cannot ascribe contradictory properties
to it.

99. From Non-Contradiction to Essence and Substance
Aristotle's argument against O shows the connexion he sees between the defence of the axioms and the discussion of
substance, the two concerns of the science of being:
In general our opponents do away with substance and essence, since they must say that everything is a coincident,
and that there is no such thing as being essentially man or being essentially animal. For if something is essentially
man, this will not be being not man or not being man; but these are the denials of being man 〈and hence should
be true if PNC is false〉. For there is, as we saw, one thing signiﬁed, and this is the substance of something. Now to
signify x's

184

CHAPTER 9 § 99

substance is to signify that being x is nothing else. But if its being essentially man is being essentially not man or
essentially not being man, then being it will be something else 〈than the substance, which is self-contradictory〉.
Hence they must say that nothing has the sort of account 〈that signiﬁes substance〉, but everything is a
coincident; for the difference between substance and coincident is just this, that white coincides in man because
man is white but not essentially white. Now if everything is said coincidentally, there will be no primary 〈subject〉
of which it is said, if 〈i.e. since〉 in every case a coincident signiﬁes a predication of some subject. (1007a20–b1)10
If we see why O's position is undermined by his failure to recognize essence and substance, we should also be able to
see why we need to recognize them.
O must deny any essential properties, because he has to say that for any property of the subject, it is possible for the
subject to lack that property. If it is possible for a property not to belong to a subject, the property is not necessary,
hence not essential.11 Hence all the properties of the subject must be merely coincidental. But now O cannot say that
the same subject is both F and not F either by being F or by being not F; for if both F and not F are coincidents, the
subject could be the same even if it lacked them; and the same is true for every other property of the subject. But if O
does not concede that any property makes the subject the same subject, he cannot claim to talk about the same subject
when he claims that the subject is both F and not F; he cannot explain why we should not take the subject that is F and
the subject that is not F to be different subjects. Hence O's implicit denial of essence leaves him with no single subject
for the contradictory properties (1007a33–b1).
Aristotle's defence of PNC has shown why we must recognize subjects and essences. For he has argued that a subject
of discourse and predication is a single subject in so far as it has an essence (1007a25–6). A substance, on this view, will
be a subject with an essence that makes it the same subject in different predications. The argument for PNC has shown
us why we need substances, and something about what substances are like.
Nothing has been said, however, about the sort of subject that Aristotle has in mind.12 The example he picks is an item
in the category of substance—man. But is it a particular man or the universal man? The argument seems to work
equally well with either at most points. Nor is it affected if we choose a subject from a non-substance category. When
Aristotle discusses essence and coincidents, his examples are Socrates and his coincidents (1007b5–16), but nothing
seems to depend on this choice of examples.
Similarly, if O claims to be speaking of a single subject with contradictory properties, he must allow some property
without its contradictory to belong to the subject; x cannot be the same subject

CHAPTER 9 § 100

185

simply by being F and not F. But this conclusion still allows many views about what the essential property might be. It
might be a disjunctive property; or it might be a temporally indexed property (e.g. being F from t1 to t2, G from t2 to
t3, etc.). Though these are not the sorts of essential properties that Aristotle normally recognizes, they are not ruled out
by the argument for PNC.
Aristotle is right not to claim that at this stage he can defend his own conception of subject and essence. We must,
indeed, expect a fairly indeﬁnite conclusion from the very general arguments about being qua being. The puzzles about
substance in Book iii showed that we ought to settle some preliminary questions about the general conditions for being
a substance, before trying to settle disputes between Aristotle, Plato, and the Presocratics, about the types of things that
meet these general conditions. In the argument for PNC Aristotle focuses on the basic subject of properties and on the
essence of such a subject; both subject and essence are connected with substance, though Aristotle does not yet clearly
identify either of them with substance. We still need to know what sort of thing can be a subject and what sort of
property can be its essence.

100. The Dialectical Character of the Argument
Aristotle admits that he has offered a dialectical argument, and indeed an argument of the sort that might arouse our
suspicions about the place of dialectical argument in the science of being.13 He acknowledges at the outset that an
argument in defence of an absolutely ﬁrst principle such as PNC might seem to be in grave danger of begging the
question; we might well suspect that the argument for PNC must assume the truth of PNC.14 Our suspicion seems
justiﬁed by the actual course of the argument; for we seem to assume PNC, in assuming that the same subject cannot
both have and lack its essential property.
Such begging of the question does not worry Aristotle. For he claimed at the outset that the argument would be quite
all right if he could make O seem to beg the question, and thereby avoid any dialectical objection to the refutation:
It should be noticed, though, that demonstration by refutation is not the same as demonstrating. In attempting to
demonstrate 〈PNC〉 someone might seem to beg the question; but if the respondent is responsible for such a
thing, it will be a refutation, not a demonstration. (1006a15–18)15
If O ﬁnds himself having to assume PNC, he cannot complain that it has been assumed, contrary to dialectical rules,
without his agreement.
Indeed, Aristotle makes O beg the question. Aristotle has not insisted

186

CHAPTER 9 § 100

in his own right that the same subject cannot both have and lack its essential property. His account of O's position has
shown that O must himself presuppose this, or else undermine his claim to be asserting contradictory properties of the
same subject. Aristotle must admit that PNC has been assumed, and that to that extent the question has been begged.
He can fairly point out, though, that if we reject the assumption about essential properties, we need not agree that O is
speaking of the same subject. Since O cannot afford to deny that he speaks of the same subject, he cannot afford to
reject PNC.
This argument, then, looks like ordinary dialectic, in so far as it relies on the interlocutor's agreement. And if in fact it
begs the question, even though the interlocutor cannot complain, must it not fall short of the standards required for a
proof in a scientiﬁc argument? Dependence on common beliefs and the agreement of interlocutors seems to be a
weakness that prevents dialectical argument from being scientiﬁc. If Aristotle admits that his argument is ad hominem
in so far as it requires the interlocutor to beg the question against himself, he apparently should not present it as an
example of strong dialectic, supporting a claim in the science of being.
The argument follows tactics that are even more reminiscent of the use of dialectic for encounters and contests. If
Aristotle set out the logical consequences and presuppositions of each admission before inviting O to make the
admission, O would notice that PNC was being assumed, and might refuse to make the admission. The tactic of
concealment is needed to prevent O from seeing that he makes a fatal admission.16 An argument that relies on such
debating tricks does not seem a credible route to scientiﬁc conclusions.
In fact, however, the argument is crucially different from ordinary dialectic. In ordinary dialectic, the initial agreement
may depend on contingent and relatively unstable features of interlocutors; different interlocutors with different ethical
views may, for instance, ﬁnd one or another ethical premiss plausible. Moreover, if the beliefs that lead us to a
dialectical conclusion are fairly easily given up, our initial acceptance of the truth of the premisses and our later
acceptance of the validity of the argument does not commit us to acceptance of the conclusion; we may prefer to give
up one of our initial admissions once we have seen its consequences.
The argument for PNC does not suffer from these objections. To show that it does not assume any particular
background of beliefs that some interlocutors might lack, Aristotle deliberately picks an extreme case. O tries to
maintain a view sharply opposed to common beliefs; and if O has to accept PNC, everyone will have to recognize it.
Similarly, it will not be easy for O to withdraw his initial admissions when he sees

CHAPTER 9 § 101

187

their consequences. He cannot refuse the initial concessions without denying that he signiﬁes a subject and ascribes
properties to it. If he denies this, he must deny that he is saying anything about how things really are at all.
If O must concede Aristotle's crucial premisses, anyone with more modest claims about how things are must also
concede them. The use of concealment does not reduce the argument to a purely ad hominem status. Concealment is
possible because we do not at ﬁrst see the connexion between O's thesis, the belief in a single subject, and the
acceptance of PNC. The discovery of the concealment does not show O a way to escape Aristotle's conclusion; it
shows how O's thesis has presupposed its own falsity.
Hence the fact that the argument makes O beg the question does not show that it is merely ad hominem in a sense that
makes it depend on the beliefs of a particular subset of interlocutors; for no other interlocutor who remains an
interlocutor can refuse the concession that O has to make. Aristotle says that anyone who refuses to make O's
concessions might as well be a vegetable, no longer attempting to communicate his beliefs about how things are
(1006a11–15, b5–9).17

101. The Status of the Conclusion
Aristotle does not mean his argument for PNC to be a demonstration or to cause doubters to believe it is true (since
perhaps no one really doubts it). Still, he can justly claim to have given a reason for believing it to be true. If strong
dialectic convinces us that PNC is presupposed in any rational inquiry into the sort of subject that is studied by a
science, our conviction gives us a reason for believing PNC.18 We do not need this reason to cause us to believe in
PNC, but once we have this reason we see why PNC should be taken for granted without demonstration.
Aristotle has not given an argument that makes it logically impossible for PNC to be false; for we might be wrong in
thinking there are any subjects of the sort that are assumed by rational inquiry. But a reason that fails to rule out the
logical possibility of error may still be a good reason. Aristotle has argued that PNC is true of being qua being; though
his arguments (naturally enough) appeal to the role of PNC in our beliefs about objective reality, they are arguments for
the conclusion that it is true of objective reality—that reality conforms to PNC whether or not we believe it does. To
this extent Aristotle intends his argument to reach a realist conclusion; and though the premisses are not logically
inconsistent with the falsity of the realist conclusion, they still constitute a good argument for it.19

188

CHAPTER 9 § 101

Aristotle does not make it clear what PNC is necessary for—meaningful thought or speech, discourse about subjects,
or discourse about how things are—about the sorts of subjects presupposed by science. But the third focus best suits
the place of the argument in the science of being. The subject is introduced as the sort of thing we study in studying
objective reality, and O raises no objection to this. He signiﬁes this sort of subject in so far as he signiﬁes the essential
property that makes it the same subject; and Aristotle argues that O prevents himself from signifying any single
subject. Perhaps we could construct an argument parallel to Aristotle's, in order to show that PNC is necessary for
meaningful thought or speech as well; but this is not his main concern.
It follows that O could reject Aristotle's argument by rejecting any belief in subjects, and by conﬁning himself to
speaking of property-instances, not combined into subjects with more than one property. Even if subjects have to
conform to PNC, perhaps not everything spoken of has to conform to it. Aristotle does not explain why O ought not
to give up subjects, though he returns to this question in his discussion of scepticism. But none the less, his argument
relies on a presupposition of scientiﬁc study; he has ‘made a new start’ from a premiss about being qua being.
In these ways Aristotle's defence of PNC counts as strong dialectic, not ordinary dialectic. For the premisses are not
ordinary common beliefs; they are common beliefs that we cannot give up without ceasing to take part in rational
discourse about how things are. The fact that they have this status gives us a good reason for relying on them that we
do not have for just any common beliefs.
It does not follow that the premisses of Aristotle's argument are self-evidently true or logically necessary; it is logically
possible for us to be wrong in thinking that we take part in rational discourse about how things are, and logically
possible for us to give up taking part in it. Still, if this is what it takes for us to reject the premisses of the argument, we
have quite strong reasons for accepting them, and they are quite reasonable examples of the sorts of premisses that
Aristotle needs if his dialectical arguments are to justify more than ordinary dialectical conclusions. The conclusions are
about being qua being; for they show how we must conceive subjects that can be regarded as bearers of coincidental
properties. We can see why the argument is dialectical, and why the conclusion is more than a merely dialectical proof
about being qua being.

CHAPTER 9 § 102

189

102. Protagoras and the Science of Being
In his argument against Protagoras Aristotle defends a further aspect of his views on substance. He believes that the
Protagorean doctrine and the denial of PNC follow from each other, and that both result from the same way of
thinking (1009a6–7). Having seen why the denial of PNC results in an intolerable conception of how things are, we
ought to see that the Protagorean conception is intolerable for the same reason, that it does not admit the sorts of
subjects that must be recognized in an account of being qua being. We therefore learn something further about the
subjects we must recognize; not only must they have essences, but the essences must be of a sort that is incompatible
with Protagoras' view of the world.
Protagoras begins from the problem of conﬂicting appearances.
Some have come to believe in the truth of appearances from perceptible things. In their view, we should not judge
whether something is true by the large or small number 〈of people who believe it〉; but the same thing seems
sweet to some who taste it, bitter to others, so that if all were sick or all insane except for two or three healthy or
sane people, these two or three, not the majority, would seem to be sick or insane. Further, many of the other
animals have appearances contrary to ours about the same thing, and even for each one of us in relation to himself
things do not always seem the same in perception. It is unclear, then, which appearances are true or false; for these
are no more true than those, but all are true or false alike. This is why Democritus says that either nothing is true or
what is true is unclear to us. (1009a38–b12)20
Protagoras wants to resist Democritus' sceptical conclusion, by arguing that the appearances do not really conﬂict. Just
as Socrates can be both tall and short (in relation to different people), things are hot and cold, white and black, for
different perceivers. Different apparent properties of objects reﬂect different interactions between objects and the
sense-organs of perceivers, and nothing has any of its properties except in so far as it enters different relations with
perceivers.21
In Aristotle's view, Protagoras offers an account of being qua being—of how things really are, and of the sorts of
things that can be objects of scientiﬁc study. He does not take Protagoras to maintain a subjectivist thesis (there is
nothing except states of consciousness) or a sceptical thesis (we are not justiﬁed in believing in the existence of
anything beyond states of consciousness).22 He takes Protagoras to offer an account of the world external to the
perceiver.
As Aristotle understands him, Protagoras wants to avoid scepticism or subjectivism, while conceding the premisses
that seem to force us into one of these positions. Aristotle thinks it fair to ask opponents of PNC what account of
reality they can give: ‘If what he says is true, then

190

CHAPTER 9 § 103

what would it mean to say that such is the nature of things that are?’ (1008b3–5). His question is fair in an argument
about being qua being. He assumes that Protagoras also wants to give an account of the nature of things, and asks him
the same question.
This interpretation explains why Aristotle thinks Protagoras is committed to a Heracleitean doctrine of radical ﬂux.
Protagoras needs ﬂux if he is to maintain the infallibility of perception against any possibility of correction:
Further, seeing that all of this nature is changing, and that nothing is truly said of what is 〈in the course of〉
changing, they thought it impossible to say anything truly of what is 〈in the course of〉 changing in every way in
all circumstances. (1010a7–9)
If the qualities of things did not change with different perceivers or different states of the same perceiver, a perceiver
might be wrong. But if something we speak of is already in the course of changing, we cannot say that it is still white, if
it appeared white to Smith at time t1 and will appear pink to Jones at t2.
The senses turn out to be right, therefore, not about the changing things that last for some length of time, but about
the purely momentary things that we perceive in a particular perceptual encounter. I perceive a momentary qualityinstance, or several of them; but none of these is a persisting subject that changes. Each momentary quality disappears
when we perceive something else. This argument does not prove that the senses report correctly on momentary
qualities, but it removes any grounds for challenging or doubting their correctness; appeal to their incorrigibility
undermines objections to their infallibility. Protagoras can therefore remove objections to his doctrine by appealing to
the truth of the Heracleitean doctrine of ﬂux.23

103. The Reply to Protagoras
Aristotle examines the subjects of change that are presupposed by radical ﬂux, and argues that Protagoras, no less than
opponents of PNC, has an unsatisfactory account of these subjects. The relevant subjects of change are not the
momentary objects that we perceive, but the persistent objects whose interaction produces the momentary perceived
objects.24 Protagoras claims that the same wind is hot and cold, the same man pale and dark. He must say the same
about substantial properties, those that allow us to speak of the same subject; for he must treat ‘man’, ‘horse’, ‘stone’,
etc. as he treated such predicates as ‘hot’. Since

CHAPTER 9 § 103

191

something may appear to you, but not to me, to be a stone, it is both a stone and not a stone; it has these properties
only in relation to a particular perceiver at a particular time.
Being a stone and not a stone implies a change in some subject; but it must be a rather minimal subject. Even
Aristotelian prime matter always has some actual qualities, as opposed to their negations, and always has deﬁnite
capacities, as opposed to their negations.25 But Protagoras must apply his restrictions to these properties too. Since the
subject can appear to some perceivers not to have any of these properties, he must say that it can be the same subject
even though it lacks them; he cannot say that the subject is the same because it retains some property in undergoing
change.
In his reply, therefore, Aristotle appeals to the identity of the subject throughout the change, and argues that
Protagoras cannot give an account of it:
Changing according to quantity is not the same as changing according to quality. Let us grant that something does
not persist according to quantity; still, it is according to the form that we know all things. (1010a23–5)26
The Heracleitean theory has to claim that the same subject can remain in being, but change in all respects. Aristotle
replies that the claim turns out to be internally inconsistent, once its presuppositions are made clear.27 If the same
subject persists, it must keep the same essential property (the ‘form’ he mentions here); but if it changes in every
respect, it cannot keep its essential property.28 Protagoras, no less than the opponent of PNC, has taken for granted
some conception of the identical subject to which he attributes properties; in this he conforms to the practice of a
special science. But, unlike the special scientist, Protagoras ought not to take such a conception for granted; for once
we understand it better, we see that it rules out Protagoras' conception of the world, and that therefore being qua being
cannot have the properties that Protagoras ascribes to it.
A similar neglect of the subject explains Protagoras' views about the dependence of external reality on perceivers. Since
Protagoras restricts being to what is perceived, he must say that nothing exists independently of animate perceivers;
but, for Aristotle, this result is impossible, since the subject that produces the perception must be prior to the
perception (1010b30–1011a2). Just as we expect movement to be explained by properties of the mover interacting
with properties of what is moved (1010b37–1011a2), we expect perception to be explained partly by properties of the
object.29 The objects must have some stable properties explaining why, when perceivers exist, the objects become

192

CHAPTER 9 § 104

perceptible. These stable properties persist when the objects are not perceived; they are the sorts of properties that
Aristotle calls potentialities. Protagoras' view must deny the existence of potentialities that explain the occurrence of
perception when it occurs.
This argument explains what is lost if we do not allow for persistent subjects. Our account of being qua being should
take enough account of change to show how change might be a proper concern of a science that studies a part of
being. If we are describing changing things, the point of recognizing a persisting subject with a stable essence is to
explain changes by referring to interactions between persistent subjects. Aristotle claims that among the persistent
properties of objects we must include stable potentialities; without these, nothing about them would explain the
changes in them or their interactions with other objects. Those who deny the existence of non-actualized potentialities
lapse into Protagoras' conception of objects; for since they deny the existence of stable potentialities, they prevent the
proper explanation of change, as Protagoras does (1047a4–7). It is reasonable for Aristotle to discuss potentialities
further in his fuller account of subjects and essences.30

104. Scepticism and the Science of Being
Aristotle has explained why Protagoras does not give an adequate account of ‘the nature of things that are’, if such an
account is supposed to describe a subject of a science that studies a part of being. We may still, however, not be
convinced that the science of being rests on a ﬁrm foundation. For the refutation of Protagoras and of the opponent
of PNC assumes a subject to which different properties are attributed. Aristotle's normal realist assumption claims that
objective features of the world (i.e. those it has independently of our beliefs about it) explain the truth of our beliefs.31
Protagoras (as Aristotle construes him) wants to regard the world as a subject for scientiﬁc study, but does not think it
has to be objective; he answers scepticism about an objective world by allowing the world to change with every change
in appearances. Aristotle replies that Protagoras cannot dispense with objectivity so easily; for his attempt to describe
the changing subject leaves no coherent description of a subject at all. To this extent Aristotle defends against
Protagoras the realist assumptions that he normally takes for granted.
Still, the defence of the realist assumptions assumes belief in a world containing subjects that are proper subjects for
scientiﬁc study; and this belief seems so close to the realist assumption that it may seem open to

CHAPTER 9 § 104

193

any doubts that arise about the realist assumption itself. Aristotle's defence of the realist assumption against Protagoras
seems to leave room for a consistent and radical form of scepticism. Sceptics appeal to conﬂicting appearances. We
cannot judge, they suggest, by majority opinion; for if only a minority were sane and the majority were mad this
criterion would give the wrong answer (1009b2–6). Nor can we judge by how things appear to us, as the particular
people we are; they appear differently to other animals, to different human beings, and to ourselves in different
conditions.32
The sceptics, therefore, see no good reason for accepting one of a pair of conﬂicting appearances over the other; they
ﬁnd that the conﬂicting appearances are ‘equipollent’ (Sextus, PH i 8, 10), and their recognition of equipollence leads
them to suspension of judgment. These radical sceptics refuse to acknowledge the existence of any subject beyond
their own appearances. It is useful to see how far Aristotle recognizes such a possibility, and how he replies to it.
He seems to recognize radical scepticism as a consistent position immune to his arguments against the opponent of
PNC.
Some people, including some who are persuaded by these things and some who merely put forward these
arguments, are puzzled. They ask who is to judge which people are healthy, and, in general, who is to judge correctly
about each thing. These sorts of puzzles are like being puzzled about whether we are now awake or asleep. All such
puzzles have the same signiﬁcance; those posing them expect to be given an argument for everything, since they
seek a principle, and seek to reach it through demonstration—for it is evident in their actions that they are not really
persuaded. But as we said, this is what happens to them; they seek an argument for things for which there is no
argument, since the starting-point of demonstration is not a demonstration. These people might easily be persuaded
of this, since it is not hard to grasp. But those who will be satisﬁed with nothing less than an argument that forces
them are asking for the impossible; for they demand 〈that we refute them by〉 stating contrary things 〈to what
they say〉, but then at once they state contrary things 〈in rejecting PNC〉. (1011a3–16)
Those who always reject PNC, and always see when it is being assumed against them cannot be refuted; for Aristotle
himself points out that the argument for PNC makes the opponents beg the question by relying on an instance of
PNC. If they refuse to let PNC be assumed at any stage of the argument, they also prevent themselves from attributing
different properties to the same subject; but if they accept this consequence, and are willing (as Aristotle puts it) to be
in the condition of vegetables, they cannot be refuted.
For similar reasons Aristotle agrees that the arguments against

194

CHAPTER 9 § 105

Protagoras will not work against a revised Protagorean who gives up Protagoras' claim to be describing the nature of
things that are. He sums up his argument against Protagoras:
If not all things are relative to something, but some things are also in themselves, not everything that appears will be
true. For what appears appears to someone. Hence whoever says that everything appearing is true makes every
being relative to something. (1011a17–20)
Aristotle takes this result to refute Protagoras. For he has asked ‘In virtue of what about the same object is it both a
man (to me) and a warship (to you)?’, and he has found that Protagoras has no convincing answer to the question. But
he thinks the revised Protagoreans can avoid the force of his argument, if they refuse to speak of how things are, and
conﬁne themselves to saying how things appear to them to be. They must also restrict the Protagorean thesis in the
same way; but if they are careful, they cannot be refuted (1011a21–b12).33

105. The Reply to Scepticism
While Aristotle recognizes this consistent sceptical position, and agrees that it cannot be refuted from premisses a
sceptic will accept, he does not infer that it is irrefutable. Instead of trying to ﬁnd some internal inconsistency in
scepticism, he challenges the premisses of the sceptical arguments about conﬂicting appearances; he insists against the
sceptic that we have good reasons for preferring one of a pair of contradictory appearances over the other. In
defending this reply, he must also challenge the sceptic's conditions for justiﬁcation.
In Aristotle's view, we have satisfactory ways of deciding that some appearances are correct and some are not.
Further, one may justiﬁably be amazed if they are puzzled about such questions as: ‘Are magnitudes and colours
such as appear to be to observers from a distance or to observers close at hand? Are they such as they appear to
healthy people, or to sick? Are those things heavier that appear so to feeble people, or to vigorous? Are those things
true that appear so to people asleep, or to those awake?’ For it is evident at least that they do not really think 〈the
appearances of the dreamer etc. are true〉—at least, no one who is in Libya and one night supposes 〈in a
dream〉 that he is in Athens goes off to the Odeion. (1010b3–11)
Since discrimination between appearances is not as difﬁcult as the sceptic suggests it is, the sceptic's problem does not
arise.
This reply may seem to miss the force of the sceptical arguments. The sceptic appeals to conﬂicting appearances,
claiming that we cannot say which are true and which false.

CHAPTER 9 § 105

195

We have no agreed criterion through which we will judge what we are going to judge in advance, and we are not
supplied with a demonstration that is true and judged 〈to be true〉, since we are still seeking the criterion of
truth, through which it is also ﬁtting to judge in addition the true demonstrations also. (Sextus, PH ii 53)34
The sceptic assumes that we are justiﬁed in believing that p only if we can prove p by appeal to some further principle
q that we are justiﬁed in believing independently of believing p, and we can produce the proof of all the predecessors
of p (i.e. of q, of the justiﬁcation of q, . . . etc.). We can stop an inﬁnite regress only if the sceptic agrees to a principle;
but he will not agree to one, because at each stage he can demand a further proof.
Aristotle, however, seeing that the sceptics rely on these epistemological claims, rejects them. He answers the claims
about conﬂicting appearances by pointing out that in fact we trust some appearances more than others; and then the
sceptics ask who is qualiﬁed to settle conﬂicts between appearances (1011a3–6). Aristotle's impatient reply will not
deter the sceptics from raising the same questions over again; and we may think he is unreasonably dogmatic.
His reply, however, rests on a stronger foundation than mere dogmatism. For he argues that his opponents have the
wrong conception of the proper sort of justiﬁcation; they look for demonstrations when they should not (1006a5–11,
1011a3–13). In asking why we believe the doctor, or how we can tell we are awake, the sceptics keep asking for a
further principle, so that they will not have to take anything on trust without a demonstration. But this demand will
never yield the right sort of justiﬁcation; ‘it would go on to inﬁnity, so that there would be no demonstration that way
either’ (1006a8–9). Once the sceptics see that the demand for demonstration is the source of their puzzles, and is itself
an unreasonable demand, they will give up their challenge (1011a11–16).
Aristotle sees that the sceptics' case will collapse unless they can persuade us, as non-sceptics, to accept their demand
as reasonable. We might accept it either because we implicitly accept these standards already, or they might persuade us
to adopt them. If Aristotle is right, we do not accept the sceptics' standards already. We do not expect every belief to be
justiﬁed by some more certain universal principle; and so the sceptics cannot simply take their standards for granted in
trying to undermine Aristotle's claim about the waking observer and the doctor.
They must, then, try to persuade us to adopt their standards. But the standards do not seem self-evident. Moreover,
the fact that they lead to scepticism does not commend them to us, since we are not sceptics yet. The sceptics need to
show both that the standards follow from other

196

CHAPTER 9 § 106

beliefs about the nature of justiﬁcation and that we have better reason to maintain these other beliefs than to modify
them once we see they imply the standards that lead to scepticism. Alternatively, sceptics may show both that
acceptance of the standards is required, not by our views about justiﬁcation in particular, but by our other beliefs and
practices, and that we have better reason to maintain these beliefs and practices than to modify them when we see their
sceptical implications. Sceptics have little hope of proving their case by any of these routes.
We should not, then, dismiss or ignore Aristotle's reply to scepticism or accuse him of failure to face the sceptical
challenge. He faces it in the right way, not by simply rejecting the consequences of scepticism, but by challenging some
of its premisses and presuppositions. He fastens quite appropriately on claims about justiﬁcation.

106. The Knowledge of First Principles
Aristotle is quite right to challenge the sceptical claim that no undemonstrated principles should be accepted as the
basis for arguments that reach true conclusions about an objective world. But his challenge to the sceptic brings us
back to a basic question about the argument in Book iv. Even if the premisses of our arguments need not be
demonstrated, the sceptic will fairly complain if the premisses rest on nothing more than common beliefs. To show
that this complaint is unwarranted, Aristotle needs to show that his premisses can claim more than the status of
ordinary dialectical premisses.
It is not so easy to say what further status Aristotle claims for his premisses. Either (a) his arguments are pure dialectic,
or (b) they involve essential appeal to intuition, or (c) they involve strong dialectic.35 The ﬁrst answer is ruled out by
Aristotle's contrast between dialectic and philosophy, unless he has entirely misconceived that contrast. We still must
choose between the second and the third answers.
When Aristotle says we must not ask for a demonstration of everything, he might be endorsing a foundationalist
doctrine, that we must accept some things with no inferential justiﬁcation at all, and that these basic beliefs warrant all
our inferred beliefs. In the Analytics, indeed, he thinks a self-evident, non-inferentially justiﬁed foundation is the only
way to avoid a vicious regress or vicious circle of justiﬁcation; and the objections to a regress or circle support the
doctrine of intuitive understanding. In Metaphysics iv, then, he might mean that we must rely on intuition of the truth of
principles or of particular judgments or of both, if we are to avoid scepticism.36
If Aristotle relies on these foundationalist principles in Metaphysics iv,

CHAPTER 9 § 106

197

he leaves himself open to the sceptical arguments against ‘assumptions’ (hupotheseis) (Sextus, PH i 168). An assumption
seems arbitrary if it is not further defended; but any further defence seems to force us back into inferential justiﬁcation,
and into the questions about circles and regresses. Moreover, if Aristotle appeals to a self-evident foundation, he makes
it hard to understand the methods of the science of being. This science ﬁnds knowledge of ﬁrst principles, not treating
them as assumptions, but offering inferential justiﬁcation by dialectical argument. The inferential justiﬁcation
introduces some circularity; but Aristotle ought to deny that the circle is vicious.
He has good grounds, then, for rejecting in Metaphysics iv the conception of justiﬁcation accepted in the Analytics. There
he treated foundationalism as the only alternative to scepticism. He does not say this in Metaphysics iv; his arguments
never rely on foundationalist doctrine, and indeed, as we have suggested, they are inconsistent with it.37 Our
discrimination among appearances, and our belief that some people are competent judges and others are not, are not
casual or arbitrary preferences. Without them we would have no grounds for belief in an objective world open to
scientiﬁc study. The conclusion that there are persistent subjects with essential properties and stable potentialities is
defended, not as a consequence of commonsense assumptions, but as a prerequisite for belief in objects of knowledge
at all.
This defence of an aspect of common sense relies on circular argument; but the sceptic has still to show why there is
anything wrong with that. Certainly Aristotle cannot safely reject all circular argument himself. In the Analytics he
rejected relatively small and uninteresting circles, and suggested that all circular reasoning would share their faults.38 If
he is to defend the arguments in Metaphysics iv, he cannot afford such a sweeping rejection of circular argument.
The conclusions therefore rest on dialectic, since they involve dialectical procedures; but since they rest on a restricted
and basic set of common beliefs, they rest on strong dialectic. The difference that Aristotle sees between dialectic and
philosophy is the difference between ordinary or ‘mere’ dialectic and strong dialectic.39 If we know only that our
opponents reject a premiss of an ordinary dialectical argument, we know only that they have departed to some degree
from common sense. If we know that they reject a premiss of a strong dialectical argument, we know that they must
reject the possibility of objectivity and knowledge altogether.
Aristotle has now answered the methodological puzzles raised in Book iii. He has described the scope and methods of
the science of being, and shown how it argues for ﬁrst principles. He ought, therefore,

198

CHAPTER 9 § 106

to face the substantive puzzles, since these drove us to look for a second-order science. Different conceptions of
substance, and of its relation to form and matter, universal and particular, seemed to rest on disputes about more basic
principles. If Aristotle has shown how a second-order universal science is possible, he should also show how it can
resolve these disputes.
Book iv suggests what the disputants about substance have been arguing about, and what standards an acceptable
account of substance should meet. A science must study a part of being, and hence, in Aristotle's view, must study
persistent subjects with essential properties. This general demand rules out a Protagorean or Heracleitean conception
of reality; it requires us to recognize potentialities explaining change in the subject and in its relation with other beings.
These results do not tell us who is right in the disputes about substance—whether it is particular, universal, form, or
matter; but they tell us something about what we ought to look for. The best candidate for substance will be the one
that best fulﬁls these conditions; and if we can ﬁnd it, we will have knowledge about substance—the knowledge sought
in Book i.

10 Substance and Essence
107. From Being to Substance
At the end of Metaphysics vii 1 Aristotle claims that his inquiry into being qua being requires, and indeed can be reduced
to, an inquiry into substance: ‘Hence the question that for a long time in the past, and still in the present, indeed always,
is pursued and always raises puzzles—“what is being?”—this is the question “what is substance?” ’ (1028b2–4)1 The
old question about being is the question that the Presocratics were asking, without realizing it (1003a28–31,
1004b8–10, 1005a29–b2). In Book iv Aristotle already claimed that substance is prior to other beings, and now he
defends that claim, by appeal to the doctrine of categories.2
In Book iv Aristotle argued that the sort of being that can be an object of knowledge must be a persistent subject with
an essence; if something does not itself satisfy that condition, but is appropriately related to a subject, it is still a being.
But he needs to show that this primary subject is a substance. First he argues that the doctrine of the categories assigns
the right role to the category of substance; the relation of substance to the other categories indicates the relation of the
basic subject to other beings, and therefore the discovery of the genuine substances will be the discovery of the basic
subjects.
Though Aristotle did not formulate the doctrine of the categories with the metaphysical demands of Book iv in mind,
these demands show that the doctrine is important in the study of being qua being, in so far as it isolates the basic
subjects. Book iv did not tell us which Aristotelian category the basic subjects would belong to; but in vii 1 Aristotle
argues that they must belong to the category of substance. He is not arguing for a trivial claim; he is asserting that the
sorts of basic subjects we need cannot be quantities, qualities, and so on, because none of these meets the proper
conditions for being a basic subject.
In Book iv Aristotle demands not only basic subjects, but basic subjects with essences. Either demand could be
expressed as a demand for ‘substance’, ousia; for in Book iv, as often elsewhere, he seems to speak indiscriminately of
both subject and essence as ousia. He should apparently be more careful, however; for though substance as subject and
substance as essence are closely connected, they seem to satisfy different criteria for substance. Questions about the
two criteria arise

200

CHAPTER 10 § 108

immediately from the appeal to the categories, since the category of ousia seems to include essences no less than
subjects.3
In claiming that substance is basic, Aristotle draws attention to these questions. First he appeals to the essencecriterion, remarking that non-substances tell us the quality, quantity, etc. of something, not what it is (1028a15–18). We
may argue that this does not exclude qualities etc. from the category of ousia, since they are the ousia of white etc., no
less than man is the ousia of men.
In reply, Aristotle examines non-substances further.
Hence someone might actually be puzzled about whether walking, ﬂourishing, or sitting signiﬁes a being; for none
of these either is in itself or is capable of being separated from substance. Rather, the walking or seated or
ﬂourishing 〈thing〉 is a better candidate—if indeed this counts as a being. But these appear better candidates
because they have some deﬁnite subject—the substance and the particular—which is indicated in such a
predication; for this subject is implied in speaking of the good or seated 〈thing〉. Clearly, then, it is because of
substance that each of those other things is also a being; and so what primarily is, what is not something 〈else, as
the sitting thing is a man〉, but is unconditionally, is substance. (1028a20–31)
This may not seem to help. Aristotle appeals to the subject-criterion, implying that non-substances are not independent
(‘capable of being separated’) subjects in the way substances are; but he does not explain why substances are not
equally inseparable from non-substances. If a man, for instance, is not capable of existing without colour or shape,
then on this point substances are no different from non-substances.4

108. The Priority of Substance
Aristotle faces this objection more directly, by introducing such compound things as walkers and musicians, which at
ﬁrst seem to falsify his claims about non-substances. On the one hand they ought to be non-substances, in so far as
they essentially have properties in non-substance categories (they are essentially musical etc.), and so differ from
Aristotle's favoured substances (as he conceives them). On the other hand, they seem to be quite good substances, by
Aristotle's main criterion; for if an individual man exists independently of anything else, so also, apparently, does an
individual walker.5
In Aristotle's view, however, these compounds actually support his claims. For musicians etc. are not genuine subjects
in their own right; since they are compounds, they require a more basic subject (e.g. man) and a non-essential property
(e.g. musicality) (1028a24–9). The claim that non-substances do not answer the ‘What is it?’ question now turns

CHAPTER 10 § 108

201

out to be more reasonable, if the question is applied to basic subjects. Hence the fact that ‘It's a musician’ answers the
‘What is it?’ question about musicians does not show that musicians are substances.
The relation between the man and the musician suggests an answer to the question about separability. A particular
three-foot length lasts through time in so far as it belongs to some surface of some body that is three feet long.
Similarly, the persistence of a particular item in some other non-substance category consists partly in the persistence of
the very same particular substance. If the substance perishes, then this particular non-substance perishes, even though
it may be replaced by another just like it.6 On the other hand, the persistence of a substance does not consist in the
persistence of any one of its particular instances of non-substantial properties. Socrates does not need his particular
instance of colour or shape or size to remain in existence, even though he needs some property-instance in these
categories.
These points also explain why a compound of a substance and a non-substance—e.g. a walker or a sitter—also
depends on a substance. The walker persists only in so far as the man who is the walker persists, but the man's
persistence does not consist in the persistence of the walker. As Aristotle says in the Analytics, the walker is a walker by
being something else, a man, whereas the man is not a man by being something else (cf. APo 83a9–14). Nonsubstances are beings ‘by being qualities (etc.)’ of substance (1028a18–19); none of them can be separated from
substance (a23–4), and the other things are beings because of substance.7
These claims about the relation of substance to non-substances (including musicians and similar compounds) imply
that substance is prior to non-substance; Aristotle makes this claim explicit by asserting that substance is prior in three
ways: in nature, account, and knowledge (1028a31–b2).8 Each type of priority is intelligible from the previous remarks
about substance.
Substance is naturally prior in so far as it is separable from other things and they are not separable from it; the same
man can exist without being a musician, but the same musician cannot exist without being the same man. For priority
in account ‘it is necessary that in the account of each thing the account of substance should be present’ (1028a35–6).
This priority is illustrated in the claim that non-substances are essentially qualities (etc.) of substance, and also in the
claim that ostensible subjects such as musicians are not spoken of without substance.9
Priority in knowledge is explained as follows: ‘We think we know each thing most, whenever we know what man or ﬁre
is, rather than when we know the quality or quantity or place, since we also think we

202

CHAPTER 10 § 109

know each of these things whenever we know what the quantity or quality is’ (1028a36–b2). It is illustrated especially
by the claim that the substantial properties of a subject tell us what it is; for these are the properties that provide
knowledge.10
Since some of these claims about priority refer to subjects, and others refer to essences, Aristotle will ﬁnd the
substances if he ﬁnds the basic subjects and the basic essences. Book iv argued that an account of being qua being
must refer to basic subjects and essences; and vii 1 connects that argument with the doctrine of the categories. The
claim that substance is the ﬁrst category, and somehow prior to non-substances, is justiﬁed by the demand of ﬁrst
philosophy for subjects and essences. To this extent vii 1 continues the argument of the science of being.

109. Criteria for Substance
The argument now takes a controversial direction. The puzzles in Book iii tended to suggest both that universals must
be substances because they are prior in deﬁnition and knowledge, and that particulars must be substances because they
are prior in being. These suggestions raise a severe difﬁculty if universals and particulars are competing for a single role
that they cannot both occupy. To remove the difﬁculty it seems plausible to suggest that substances are
multivocal—that in one sense of ‘substance’ (i.e. ‘basic subject’) particulars are the substances, and in another sense
(i.e. ‘essence’) universals are. Aristotle's doctrine of ﬁrst and second substance in the Categories might suggest this
solution, though it is not the solution he actually adopts there.11
It is striking that in Book vii Aristotle denies himself any solution that appeals at the outset to multivocity. In vii 1 he
begins by remarking that the ﬁrst type of being signiﬁes ‘what it is and this’ (ti esti kai tode ti, 1028a11–12); and so he
already combines the criteria that suggest multivocity.12 He speaks of substances as a ‘deﬁnite subject’ that is ‘the
substance and the particular’ (1028a26–7); but he appeals no less clearly to the connexion between substance and
essence. He does not at all suggest that different types of substance might display the different types of priority. It
would have been easy for Aristotle to add ‘We have distinguished ﬁrst and second substances elsewhere’, if he had
wanted to appeal to multivocity; and so his silence about multivocity at this stage is probably the result of deliberate
choice.
He remains silent about it in his formulation of the main question. In vii 2 he lists the diverse candidates for substance;
but then he begins Chapter 3 with a new list:
Substance is spoken of, if not in several ways, at any rate in four main cases. For

CHAPTER 10 § 109

203

in fact the essence, the universal, and the genus seem to be the substance of each thing, and the fourth of these is
the subject. (1028b33–6)13
He groups the ﬁrst three ostensible criteria together, in contrast to the fourth, and so offers two main criteria, as
though they are clearly criteria for the same thing (cf. 1042a12–16).14 His formulation of the question is most
misleading unless he intends the reader to avoid relying on assumptions about multivocity.
The difference between Aristotle's earlier treatments of substance and the presentation of the issues in vii 1–3 shows
how he thinks he should conduct this part of the science of being.15 He turns away from a merely dialectical solution,
by refusing to exclude views simply because they offend common sense; hence he does not argue from agreed
examples. Nor does he appeal, as ordinary dialectic might, to multivocity. Substances may still turn out to be
multivocal; but such a claim should result from the argument, and it should not be imported at the outset from
reﬂexion on common beliefs.
While Aristotle avoids some moves that belong to ordinary dialectic, he also relies on moves that belong to strong
dialectic, and so have a proper place in ﬁrst philosophy. In Book iv he ﬁnds that talk and knowledge of being must be
about persistent subjects with essential properties; and he sees that different candidates for substance reﬂect different
attempts to satisfy this demand. The four ostensible criteria for substance turn out to presuppose these two basic
demands on being. If we can see what satisﬁes the demands, we can justly claim to have found genuine
substances—not just those recognized by common sense, but those that should be recognized in a science of being.
Aristotle avoids the appeal to multivocity because it conceals apparently genuine questions. If we argue, by appeal to
multivocity, that particulars are substances because they are subjects and hence are prior in being, and that universals
are substances because they are essences and hence are prior in knowledge and deﬁnition, we still have not solved all
the puzzles. For the remarks (in vii 1) on priority suggest that the same things should be prior in all the different ways;
and if this is true, then there will after all be just one correct account of substance, and we will miss it if we begin by
assuming multivocity.
Moreover, by avoiding any initial appeal to multivocity, Aristotle actually stays closer to common beliefs and to the
history of metaphysical speculation. There seems to be a signiﬁcant dispute about whether matter or form, particular
or universal, is substance, and we do not seem to dissolve the question if we say that the different candidates satisfy
different accounts of what a substance is. It still seems reasonable to ask which of the accounts is the correct or basic
account, and which candidate is the genuine substance.16

204

CHAPTER 10 § 110

If some one type of substance satisﬁes all the criteria, we can defend an aspect of common sense that may otherwise
seem indefensible. The puzzles about substance puzzle us partly because we have a fairly ﬁrm conviction that
commonsense objects such as horses, trees, and men—the ﬁrst substances of the Categories—are in some way basic
realities; we do not want them reduced to temporary modiﬁcations of matter or to temporary instantiations of
universals. If, however, we recognize two multivocal types of substance meeting different criteria, we may well ﬁnd that
the commonsense objects fall unsatisfactorily in the middle; they may seem to be neither the clearest subjects nor the
clearest essences. But if we insist that the best candidate for substance must satisfy both criteria, then the
commonsense objects may do better. Though ﬁrst philosophy does not conﬁne itself to the common beliefs—or
rather, because it does not conﬁne itself to them—its defence of them may be better than any defence that ordinary
dialectic can offer.

110. Substance as Subject
At the end of vii 2 Aristotle distinguishes different views about the types of substances there are; and immediately he
sketches in outline his own view of what substance is (1028b27–32). The different views are the ones that raised the
puzzles in Book iii; and Aristotle does not answer the puzzles immediately. Though his initial sketch takes him a mere
ﬁfteen lines, the questions it raises require considerable further discussion before its correctness is clear. As Books iii
and iv have suggested, the preliminary questions raised by the puzzles need to be discussed, so that false assumptions
about the questions do not lead to misconstrual of the puzzles. In this case the false assumptions concern the
interpretation of the subject-criterion and the relation between subject and essence. The task of removing these false
assumptions occupies Aristotle for the rest of Book vii.
Far from suggesting that substances are multivocal, Aristotle argues very brieﬂy for one univocal outline account of
substance, and for the allegedly successful candidate for substance. He claims that the subject-criterion tells us what
substance is, and he suggests that form is the candidate that best meets the subject-criterion. He implies that only one
criterion needs to be considered, and that this one criterion leads to only one successful candidate.
It is reasonable to begin by discussing the subject-criterion. The Presocratics conceive substance as the persisting
subject, and therefore identify substance with matter (983b6–18). Aristotle himself recognizes

CHAPTER 10 § 110

205

the importance of a basic subject (1007a20–b1). In Chapter 1 he suggests that a basic subject is a particular substance
such as a particular man (1028a25–8). This suggestion runs ahead of the argument; for since the criterion is still
unclear, he cannot justify a decision about the candidates. In Chapter 3 he afﬁrms the correctness of the subjectcriterion, and prepares to clarify it.
He presents the outline answer as a consequence of the subject-criterion, suitably interpreted:
Now the subject is that of which the other things are said, but which itself is not said of any other thing; hence we
must deﬁne it ﬁrst, since the ﬁrst subject seems to be substance most of all. Now matter, shape, and the thing
composed from them are called 〈the ﬁrst subject〉 in three different ways. (By ‘matter’ I mean, e.g., bronze; by
‘shape’ the arrangement of the ﬁgure; and by ‘thing composed from them’ the statue, the compound.) And so if
form is prior to matter, and more of a being, it will also, by the same argument, be prior to the thing composed
from both. We have now said in outline, then, what substance is: it is what is not 〈said〉 of a subject but what has
the other things 〈said〉 of it. (1028b36–1029a9)
The ﬁrst sentence of the passage speciﬁes the subject-criterion through the ‘predication-formula’, describing the
subject as the ultimate bearer of predicates.17 In speaking of substance ‘most of all’ and of the ‘ﬁrst’ or ‘primary’
subject, Aristotle implies that one substance can be more or less a substance than another.18 To identify the highest
grade of substance, he augments the subject-criterion; and he concludes that substances of the highest grade are the
subset of subjects that are primary subjects. If there are primary subjects, they must meet some further condition
besides the predication-formula, which simply picks out subjects. Some subjects must be prior to others, in one or
more of the three ways distinguished in Chapter 1; these are the primary subjects.
Aristotle now strongly suggests that form is a primary subject, and indeed prior to matter and compound. In claiming
that form is the successful candidate, and at the same time accepting the subject-criterion, he implies that the form
satisﬁes the subject-criterion.
Aristotle never rejects this outline answer, or the claims of form to be the successful candidate. But both the answer
and the candidate seem highly controversial, and Aristotle realizes this. We will have a better view of the direction of
his whole argument about substance if we raise some of the objections to the answer and to the candidate, and see
what Aristotle must say to meet the objections.

206

CHAPTER 10 § 111

111. Strategy
The major criteria for substance seem to challenge different parts of Aristotle's outline answer. The essence-criterion
seems to lead to the universal, and therefore to the genus, which is more universal than the species (cf. 998b14–19);
but the subject-criterion seems to lead to the particular. If one criterion requires substance to be a generic universal,
and another requires it to be a basic particular, no one candidate seems to satisfy both criteria.
The outline answer is therefore surprising, because it seems to attend exclusively to the subject-criterion, but ought to
attend to the essence-criterion. The view that both criteria ought to be considered leads naturally to the conclusion that
substances must be multivocal, since it is not clear how the two criteria could be criteria for the same thing.
To reject the resort to multivocity, and to defend the outline answer, Aristotle must argue that (a) an essence need not
be a universal, or that (b) a subject need not be a basic particular. In fact he argues for a version of both claims. First he
argues that a subject need not be the sort of basic particular that matter is. Next he argues that the essence need not be
a universal. If the two criteria can be reinterpreted in these ways, the outline answer is more plausible than it seemed.
Aristotle's suggestion that form is substance is also controversial. He has given no argument for the suggestion, and
his discussion of substance in earlier works does not clearly support it.19 His earlier works do indeed suggest that form
is essence; and hence he might reasonably suggest that form is substance if he were appealing to the essence-criterion.
However, he actually defends form by appeal to the subject-criterion, which does not seem to favour it.20
The claims of form to be substance will be far more plausible if the two criteria for substance are reinterpreted in the
way that favours the outline answer. The right reinterpretation, Aristotle thinks, will show that form is both the right
sort of subject, satisfying the essence-criterion, and the right sort of essence, satisfying the subject-criterion. Later in
Book vii it turns out that the particular form satisﬁes both criteria, and therefore is substance.
In these ways the outline answer presented at the beginning of Chapter 3 introduces the whole argumentative strategy
of Aristotle's discussion. He sees that his outline is brief and controversial, and he seeks to settle the controversy by
further explanation.
His strategy results naturally from his attitude to the puzzles that were raised in Book iii and suggested in vii 2. The
puzzles raised preliminary questions about the proper criteria for substance; and Aristotle suggests that a
reexamination of the criteria will lead to a new attitude to the

CHAPTER 10 § 112

207

different candidates. It is easy to suppose that the subject-criterion must favour particular material subjects, and that
the essence-criterion must favour universal essences. Either we decide that the puzzles are insoluble, or we resort to
multivocity. Aristotle focuses on the preliminary questions about the nature of subjects and essences, and argues that
the criteria, rightly understood, allow us a reasonable solution that avoids the puzzles. We need not resort to
multivocity if we see that a single account of substance and a single candidate will solve the puzzles.
The emergence of the preliminary questions from the puzzles in Book iii has prepared us for an approach to the
puzzles that is characteristic of dialectic in general, but especially appropriate for strong dialectic. Aristotle advises the
dialectician to approach the puzzles by ‘making a new start’, beginning from some assumption that has not been called
into question in the arguments leading to the puzzles.21 He follows this advice in vii 3. The puzzles raise questions
about the different candidates, and even about more general conditions for substance—both particulars and universals
seem to violate reasonable conditions. But these puzzles have not shown that we should reject the subject-criterion and
the essence-criterion.
Moreover, Book iv has given us a special reason for not rejecting these criteria. For study of being qua being has
shown that we should recognize subjects with essences; and further study of these criteria for substance should show
us how to combine them satisfactorily. On this point ﬁrst philosophy guides us in choosing the assumptions to be used
for the ‘new start’ in answering the puzzles. We have some argument, apart from common beliefs, for accepting these
assumptions as the basis of the argument about substance.
Though Aristotle does not make the progress of his argument clear at each stage, the stages are discernible, and viii 1
marks them in its summary, emphasizing the importance of the discussion of essence (1042a17–21), claiming that the
universal is not substance (1042a21) and that the subject is substance (1042a26).22 We must try to follow the stages of
the argument to this conclusion. Though this conclusion is reached in viii 1, the rest of viii and ix are also important,
since they explain some of the major claims in vii.23

112. Subject as Matter
Aristotle begins his defence of the outline answer as soon as he has stated it. First he acknowledges that it needs
further explanation.

208

CHAPTER 10 § 112

However, we must not conﬁne ourselves to this answer. For it is inadequate in two ways: ﬁrst, the answer itself is
unclear, and further, matter turns out to be substance. For if this is not substance, it escapes us what other
substance there is. For when the other things are removed, nothing 〈else besides matter〉 evidently remains.
(1029a9–12)24
The outline answer is inadequate by itself because it does not justify the claims of Aristotle's candidate. Instead of
making it clear why form satisﬁes the subject-criterion, and therefore counts as substance, the outline answer by itself
allows us to claim that either matter is the only substance or there is no substance.25
This complaint, however, does not lead Aristotle to reject the outline answer, or to reject the subject-criterion and the
predication-formula that support the answer. He must, therefore, intend some reinterpretation that avoids the
unwelcome result about matter. The predication-formula must be open to two interpretations, one implying that either
matter is substance or nothing is, and the other supporting the claims of Aristotle's own candidate.
The predication-formula suggests quite readily that matter is the only subject. The ‘other things’ that we remove are
the things said of a subject; and their removal is quite reasonable. For the predication-formula requires us to
distinguish them from the subject itself (cf. Catg. 7a31–b1) if we are to ﬁnd what satisﬁes the subject-criterion for
substance.
The removal has two stages. First (1029a12–13) we remove the affections, actions and capacities of a body, leaving a
body as the subject. The removal certainly means that the affections etc. are not substances. But it also means that the
body, in so far as it has these affections, is not a substance; its having these affections does not make it a substance. For
the body qua affected is predicated of the body; to speak of the pale body is already to speak of pallor predicated of the
body, and hence the pale body, as such, cannot be the subject.
The second stage of removal (1029a14–16) argues that we cannot stop with the subject we have found at the ﬁrst stage
(cf. 1001b26–1002a8). The body as such is analysable into dimensional properties and the subject that they are
predicated of, so that the subject bounded by these dimensional properties is substance: ‘so that matter must appear
the only substance if we examine it this way’ (1029a18–19). If we accept the subject-criterion and the predicationformula, then apparently we make matter identical to substance, the only substance, because nothing predicated of
matter seems to meet the test for being a subject.
Aristotle seems to have applied to his ‘ordinary’ substances the sort of argument that he normally applies to ‘apparent
subjects’ to show that they are not genuine subjects. We ﬁnd that a walker or a musician is not

CHAPTER 10 § 112

209

a substance because he is not a genuine subject; he can be analysed into a more basic subject, a man, and some nonessential property. We have often noticed that Aristotle's ordinary substances seem to allow the same sort of analysis,
into a more basic subject, their matter, and some non-essential property. In vii 3 he sees this point, and uses it to show
why matter appears to be the only basic subject, and hence the only real substance. The argument is powerful because
it seems to be the one that Aristotle uses in vii 1 to show that walkers are not substances.
In vii 1 he also insists that substance must be independent of, and prior to, non-substance; and in vii 3 he explains why
matter meets this condition:
By ‘matter’ I mean what in itself is neither said to be something, nor said to be of some quantity, nor said to be any
of the other things by which being is deﬁned. For there is something of which each of these is predicated, and its
being is different from that of each of the things predicated; for the other things are predicated of substance, and
substance of matter. And so the last thing is in itself neither something nor of some quantity nor any other 〈of the
things mentioned〉; nor is it 〈in itself〉 the negations of these, since the negations as well 〈as the positive
properties〉 will belong to it coincidentally. (1029a20–6)
A piece of matter, e.g. the lump of bronze that now constitutes this statue, has both positive and negative properties
coincidentally. Just as Socrates does not need his particular colour or shape if he is to remain in existence, the lump of
bronze needs none of its particular categorial properties—it need not be a statue, or have this shape or colour.26 It
remains the same piece of bronze as long as it retains the capacities for affecting and being affected that are essential to
bronze; its being, as Aristotle would say, consists in its capacities.27
If one thing is naturally prior to another, then the ﬁrst can exist without the second, but the second cannot exist
without it. A piece of matter seems to meet both these conditions. First, it is separable from an ‘ordinary’ substance
(e.g. the particular statue or man) in the way it is separable from its coincidents. Second, an ordinary substance and its
property-instances seem to depend on the existence of a piece of matter, and therefore seem to be predicated of it,
whereas it is not predicated of them. Since the matter is naturally prior, it alone seems to satisfy the predicationformula, and hence seems to be the only substance. The same argument seems to show why an ordinary substance and
its form do not satisfy the predication-formula.
The subject-criterion, therefore, seems to provide strong reasons for believing that either matter is substance or
nothing is. Aristotle appeals to his arguments in Chapter 1; suggests that the predication-formula underlies them; and
argues that the predication-formula, as he interprets it, allows matter, at most, to be substance. Since the argument is
not

210

CHAPTER 10 § 113

obviously invalid and he seems to accept the premisses, he needs to explain why he rejects the conclusion. In
particular, he should explain why the predication-formula does not require the unwelcome conclusion.

113. Further Tests for Substance
Aristotle insists that matter cannot be the only substance:
And so, if we study it from this point of view, the result is that matter is substance; but that is impossible. For being
separable and being a this also seem to belong to substance most of all; hence the form and the compound would
seem to be substance more than matter is. (1029a26–30)
Attention to separability and thisness is supposed to show that form and compound are substances to a higher degree
than matter; and we have seen (1029a1–2) that degrees of substance correspond to more and less primary subjects.
Separability and thisness should therefore distinguish primary subjects from other subjects. These tests should not
replace the subject-criterion; and they should still imply that something is a substance if and only if it is a subject
satisfying the predication-formula. They ought, moreover, to show us what is wrong with the argument that makes
matter the only substance; if we simply ﬁnd other powerful arguments for treating form and compound as substances,
we have raised a further puzzle.
At this point Aristotle does not explain how he understands ‘this’ and ‘separable’, or how he thinks attention to these
features of substance will challenge the argument for matter. Instead, he ends the chapter by reasserting that matter,
form, and compound are all substances:
We should dismiss the substance composed of both—I mean the one composed of matter and form—since it is
posterior and clear. And matter is also evident in a way. But we should examine the third 〈type of substance〉,
since this raises the most puzzles. (1029a30–3)
The only reason he has given for treating these three as substances is his previous claim that they satisfy the subjectcriterion and the predication-formula (1029a2–7). Since, therefore, he reasserts that they are substances, he cannot
suppose that the subject-criterion and the predication-formula really make matter the only possible substance. He
ought to show how form meets these tests for substance and turns out to be a more primary subject than matter.
This conclusion of vii 3 needs emphasis, because Aristotle recalls and uses it later in his argument about substance. He
accepts the three candidates for substance (1035a1–2; cf. DA 412a6–9), and reafﬁrms that they satisfy the subjectcriterion (1042a26–31). Form is a subject, and it

CHAPTER 10 § 114

211

is a primary substance because it is a this (1038b4–6, 1042a28–9, 1049a34–5; cf. DA 412a7–9). Since it is not obvious
how form is a subject, Aristotle is quite right to say that it raises the most puzzles.28
To resolve the puzzles he does not explain his claims about thisness and separability, but turns instead to the
discussion of essence as a criterion for substance (1029b1–3). He does not forget the point of his argument, however.
For he remarks in Chapter 13 that he has now ﬁnished his discussion of the subject-criterion and the essence-criterion,
and that he has found two types of subjects—the this (i.e. the form) and the matter (1038b5–6).29 This same distinction
between two types of subject is drawn in ix 7 (1049a27–36), where the ﬁrst kind of subject is again called a this
(1049a28), and in the second case the item predicated of matter is called a form and a this (1049a35). In both passages
Aristotle implies that the ﬁrst type of subject is also the second type of item predicated, and that it is a form.30
Elsewhere too, he claims that the form is a this (1042a28–9); his claim is only to be expected, since in vii 3 he insists
that form is the best candidate for being the sort of subject that is substance.
Aristotle's discussion of essence, then, should show how form is subject and substance; and in the course of the
argument he should also undermine the argument for matter in Chapter 3, since otherwise he will create a new puzzle.

114. Essence and Subject
Aristotle justiﬁes his attention to essence by appeal to his normal method of proceeding from what is knowable to us
to what is knowable by nature (1029b3–12).31 The notion of essence is reasonably familiar, and appropriate for the sort
of dialectical discussion found in the Topics. Aristotle begins with some ‘logical’ discussion of it, the sort of thing to be
expected in pure dialectic (1029b13; cf. 1041a28); he introduces this dialectical discussion by considering the use of a
common expression, ‘in itself ’ (1029b13–14).
But he soon turns from purely dialectical discussion to a different sort of argument, asking us to consider both ‘how
we ought to speak’ and ‘how things are’ (1030a27–8). ‘How we ought to speak’ is the concern of pure dialectic; and
from this point of view, everything that we can deﬁne as being a certain way ‘in itself ’ counts as having an essence.
‘How things are’ is the concern of strong dialectic, practised by ﬁrst philosophy; and from this point of view, essence
belongs in the primary way only to substances and thises (1030a28–32).32
This claim explains why clariﬁcation of the essence-criterion should

212

CHAPTER 10 § 114

clarify the subject-criterion, and therefore explains why discussion of the essence-criterion precedes the clariﬁcation of
the subject-criterion. A proper grasp of the essence-criterion should lead us to a certain type of basic subject. The
essence of x, as Book iv has understood it, is the property of x that makes x the same subject in different
predications—the property that x must retain to remain in existence. To ﬁnd something that has an essence is to ﬁnd a
subject; some subjects will have essences in their own right, and others will not. If, for instance, the persistence of x
consists partly in the existence of y, but the persistence of y does not consist partly in the persistence of z (whether or
not z = x), y has an essence in its own right, and x has an essence only because of y. If we examine essence according to
‘how things are’, not simply according to ‘how we ought to speak’, we ought to ﬁnd the things that have essences in
their own right.
Aristotle approaches this question by beginning from pure dialectic, and asking whether there is such a thing as the
essence of pale man and of similar compounds of substance and non-substance (1029b22–7). At ﬁrst the answer
seems to be clearly Yes. If the essence of something is simply what is speciﬁed in its deﬁnition, it seems obvious that
pale man has an essence, since we can say what a pale man is ‘in himself ’. From the purely dialectical point of view,
there is no difﬁculty; and in the Topics Aristotle suggests no reason for discrimination between items in different
categories.
In the Metaphysics, however, he requires a substance to be a genuine basic subject, not simply a subject recognized by
grammar or common sense. In Chapter 1 he contrasts men with walkers, remarking that a walker has something
else—the substance and the particular—as its subject, since the walker is not spoken of without this subject
(1028a20–8). The fact that the walker is not spoken of without its subject shows that it is not separable in the way a
substance is (cf. 1028a22–4, a28–9, a33–4).
This contrast is relevant to essence; for a thing's essence includes properties that it must retain if it is to persist through
time and change. Since a walker cannot persist without being (e.g.) a man, he has no genuine essence of his own; his
persistence depends on the persistence of some more basic subject independent of him. If the man is not similarly
dependent on some more basic subject independent of him, he has a genuine essence.
If we recognize an essence corresponding to every account of what something is, and we allow that something persists
just as long as its essence persists, then we must allow a surprisingly large number of things to come to be and to
perish. If a pale man ceases to be pale, then the essence of the pale man perishes, and the pale man perishes. We are

CHAPTER 10 § 115

213

inclined to say that in fact nothing has really perished; all that has happened is that a man has ceased to be pale. If we
say this, however, we must claim that what primarily has the essence is the man, not the pale man as such; pale men, as
such, are not the sorts of things that come to be, persist, and perish.33
Aristotle claims that walkers are not separable in the way men are; and his argument about essence explains that claim
too, since the particular walker depends on the particular man for his survival, but the particular man does not depend
on the particular walker. So far, as we expect, the basic subject turns out to be separable. It also turns out to be a this;
for Aristotle claims that the basic subject, the primary bearer of an essence and deﬁnition, must be a this (1030a2–6).34
In vii 1 substance is said to signify the this as well as the what-it-is (1028a11–12); the answer to the ‘What is it?’
question is supposed to pick out substance (1028a13–20); and the substance is the particular (to kath'hekaston, 1028a27)
that is the ‘deﬁnite subject’ (a26–7) for such things as walkers and healthy things. A this must be a basic subject, the
sort of thing that was described in the Analytics as something that is what it is ‘not by being something else’ (APo
83a9–14). The same contrast between different ways something can be what it is is marked in Metaphysics vii 1 as the
contrast between ‘being something’ (applying to non-basic subjects) and ‘being unconditionally’ (applying to
substances) (1028a29–31).35
In Chapter 4 Aristotle explains that the thises, the basic subjects, are those that have the primary essential properties.
The description that picks out a this is the one that correctly answers the ‘What is it?’ question, and we answer this
question by identifying the properties whose persistence is the persistence of the subject. Since the persistence of the
musician depends on the persistence of the man, but the persistence of the man is independent of the persistence of
the musician, the man has the primary essential properties, and therefore he is (as far as this argument goes) the basic
subject and the this.

115. A Revised Criterion for Substance
Aristotle connects his discussion of essence, subject, substance, and thisness with the argument of Chapter 3, by
reintroducing the predication-formula.
The essence is what a this is; but whenever one thing is said of another, it is not what a this 〈is〉, if being a this
belongs only to substances. (1030a3–6)
. . . and such 〈i.e. primary〉 are however many things are spoken of not by one

214

CHAPTER 10 § 115

thing being said of another. Hence essence will belong to none of the things that are not species of genera, but to
these alone, since they seem to be spoken of not in accordance with participation and affection nor as a coincident.
(1030a10–14)
Satisfaction of the predication-formula seems to be necessary and sufﬁcient for having an essence and so being a this.
This appeal to the predication-formula may puzzle us. As he says of another dialectical argument, he seems to have
taken a different route that has brought him back to the same place (EN 1097a24). In Chapter 3 he seems to argue
that the search for a basic subject leads to matter. Grammar seems to make walkers and musicians subjects; but
common sense recognizes that they are not genuine subjects in the way that men or horses are. The question is
whether common sense can defend this distinction without being forced to go further and admit that men are not
genuine subjects either.
The argument in Chapter 4 takes one new turn, which at ﬁrst only increases the puzzle. For Aristotle now seems to
insist that a this and a primary subject must satisfy the predication-formula; but in vii 3 the predication-formula
seemed to make matter the only substance, and thisness was supposed to show how form and compound would be
substances to a higher degree than matter. Moreover, Aristotle implied that form and compound did not satisfy the
predication-formula; for he said that substance is predicated of matter (1029a23–4), and even if he had not said so it
would seem obvious that ‘the bronze is a statue’ must express such a predication.36
If the predication-formula makes matter the only substance, and thisness requires satisfaction of the predicationformula, appeal to thisness will apparently not reveal any substances other than matter. If, on the other hand, thisness
does not imply satisfaction of the predication-formula, being a this seems neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for being a
substance; and if it excludes satisfaction of the predication-formula, no this can be a substance.
The predication-formula, however, was said to be insufﬁcient by itself and unclear (1029a9–10), leaving itself open to
different interpretations; and we should now be able to say what the unclarity is. If the predication-formula implies that
thisness and separability are further conditions beyond satisfaction of the formula, but also implies that they are just
the same condition as satisfaction of the formula, it cannot be the same formula that has both implications. Hence the
original formula must be ambiguous between two different formulae with different implications.
Aristotle suggests what the different formulae might be, when he says that the primary objects of deﬁnition ‘are
spoken of not by one thing

CHAPTER 10 § 115

215

being said of another’ (1030a10–11), instead of saying simply that they are not said of another thing. The two different
predication-formulae implicitly distinguished here are these:
1. The broad predication-formula: x is a substance if and only if x is not predicated of anything else, as, e.g., the
statue is predicated of the bronze in ‘The bronze is a statue’.
2. The narrow predication-formula: x is a substance if and only if x is not spoken of by y being predicated of z
(whether or not y = x), as, e.g., the musician is spoken of by musicality being predicated of the man.
If something can satisfy the narrow formula without satisfying the broad formula, then the admission that something
is predicated of matter does not imply that it is not a substance. The argument for identifying matter with substance is
sound, if the broad formula is assumed; but if the narrow formula is assumed, the argument has not been shown to be
sound.
This difference between the broad and the narrow formula explains why the argument about essences and basic
subjects might not lead to the identiﬁcation of matter with the basic subject and substance. In ﬁnding which things
have essences in their own right, and which have essences because of something else, we should rely on the narrow
formula, not the broad formula. For the broad formula does not imply that the thing predicated essentially depends on
the subject it is predicated of; but in the narrow formula the extra phrase ‘spoken of not by one thing being said of
another’ implies exactly this essential dependence. Pale men are essentially one thing said of another; that is what their
being consists in, because they depend on the more basic subject. If the bronze is a statue, however, it does not follow
that the statue depends on the bronze; appeal to the narrow formula does not force us to agree that matter is the only
substance.
If Aristotle intends the narrow formula, he is entitled to claim that its requirements coincide with those of separability
and thisness.37 The man is separable from, and naturally prior to, the musician, in so far as this man can exist without
being this musician but the musician cannot exist without being this man. A man is a this and a musician is not, if a
man is not, but a musician is, spoken of by one thing being said of another. The test for thisness expresses the demand
that substance should be prior in account and knowledge.38
Aristotle has good reason, then, for assuming that thisness and separability pick out the same candidates for substance,
and that the subject-criterion makes them reasonable tests for substance.

216

CHAPTER 10 § 116

116. A Preliminary Solution of the Puzzles
If this is right, then Aristotle's discussion of essences and primary subjects in vii helps to solve the puzzle he has raised.
In Chapter 3 he suggested that the predication-formula is correct; that it is not equivalent to the requirement for
thisness and separability; and that it makes matter the only substance. We now see that the last two claims are true only
for the broad formula, and that the ﬁrst is true for the narrow formula. The narrow formula, introduced in Chapter 4,
is equivalent to the requirement for thisness and separability. The introduction of these requirements at the end of
Chapter 3 suggests that Aristotle accepts the narrow rather than the broad formula.
This conclusion is important for our estimate of the strategy of Book vii. For if only the broad formula captured the
subject-criterion, it would have been quite odd of Aristotle to end Chapter 3 by reafﬁrming both the subject-criterion
and the claims of form and compound to be substance; for the broad formula undermines these claims. We would
perhaps have to conclude that Aristotle abandons the subject-criterion, even though he clearly speaks as though he
accepts it. If, however, the narrow formula captures the predication-formula, the subject-criterion may not make
matter the only substance, and so Aristotle may be right to imply that form and compound satisfy the subject-criterion.
Aristotle still accepts the subject-criterion. We have not been convinced yet that form and compound satisfy the
subject-criterion, or that form satisﬁes it better than matter and compound do. Since the form was his favoured
candidate, and since he takes it to be separable and a this, he implies that it satisﬁes the narrow predication formula.
He has not argued for this implicit claim; it may turn out that form depends essentially on some more basic subject in a
way that undermines its claim to satisfy the subject-criterion. But it does not seem hopeless for Aristotle to try to
convince us of his claims; for the narrow predication-formula offers an interpretation of the subject-criterion that
might support his claims.39
The discussion of essence in vii 4 deﬁnes more exactly what must be proved about form. An essence belongs to
whatever has a deﬁnition; but only a primary thing, not one thing said of another, has a deﬁnition. What has the
essence is the primary thing that persists; this is the basic subject, and so it is the substance. Hence the search for the
primary bearers of essences leads us back to the primary subjects, which are substances. The secondary things will
depend on substances for their essences. This claim supports the assumption of vii 1, that such apparent subjects as
walking (a non-substance) and the walker (a coincidental

CHAPTER 10 § 117

217

combination) depend for their essence on the primary subject with the primary essence.
The claim about essence is metaphysical, and so cannot be proved by ordinary dialectic, because it rests on views about
how things really are. It is reasonable to claim that some things will have essences primarily, other things secondarily.
But it is not clear what the primary things with essence are. Aristotle speaks as though they are the items in his category
of substance—men, horses, etc. But he has given no adequate reason for treating these as the primary subjects with
essences.

117. Essence as Particular
In vii 4 Aristotle argues that the primary bearers of essences are the primary subjects, and hence the substances.40 In vii
6 he argues further that the primary subjects and their essences are really the same, so that in a way it is misleading to
distinguish the bearer of the essence from the essence it bears. This claim is introduced in the report of two common
beliefs: ‘Each thing seems to be nothing other than its own substance, and the essence is said to be the substance of
each thing’ (1031a17–18).
We may suspect an equivocation here; the ﬁrst claim seems to refer to substance as subject, but the second to
substance as essence. Aristotle's argument, following his strategy in Book vii, seeks to show that no equivocation is
involved. In Chapter 1 he speaks as though the same thing would be both a this and an essence. In Chapter 3 he claims
that form, the most plausible candidate for meeting the essence-criterion, meets the subject-criterion. In Chapter 6 he
supports this claim by arguing that the primary subjects must be identical to their essences.
In Chapter 4, Aristotle prepares for his claim about substance and essence, by distinguishing primary from secondary
bearers of essences; and the conclusion of Chapter 6 observes that distinction.
Clearly, then, in the case of the primary things, those spoken of in themselves, a thing and its essence are one and
the same. And it is evident that the sophistical refutations aimed against this position are all resolved by the same
solution that solves the puzzle of whether Socrates and his essence are the same; for there is no difference in the
〈assumptions〉 from which one would ask 〈the sophistical questions and the questions about Socrates〉 or in
the 〈premisses〉 from which one would ﬁnd a solution. (1032a4–10)41
The ‘primary things’ are ‘spoken of in themselves’, and so not ‘by one thing being said of another’. They therefore
satisfy the narrow

218

CHAPTER 10 § 117

predication-formula, and so satisfy the subject-criterion. These subjects are identical to their essences.
This passage suggests that Socrates, taken to be a ‘primary thing’, is identical to his essence; but we may ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to identify a particular with its essence. For we may suppose that essences are properties; properties are universals; only
universals can be identical to universals; and therefore only universals can be identical to their essences.42 It follows
that, if substances are identical to their essences, only universals can be substances.
If Aristotle means this, however, he damages his argument. For the things that are identical to their essences are
primary and intrinsic beings (1031b13–14, 1032a4–6); these primary and intrinsic beings should be the things so
described in Chapter 4 (1030a7–14); these are substances (1030a19, 23); and substances are thises (1030a3–7, 19).
Moreover, Aristotle has already committed himself to a deﬁnite view about the sorts of things that are thises. In
Chapter 1 he connects substance, this, and particular. In Chapter 3 thisness and separability imply that the form and
the compound are substances, and therefore subjects, more than matter is; and the subjects recognized so far have
been particulars.
If Aristotle does not intend the primary and intrinsic beings to be particular subjects, he has misled us; for in Chapter 4
the primary beings seemed to be thises and particulars, and if this is not true in Chapter 6 also, the argument has gone
strangely off course. Throughout the argument so far he has assumed both that substance is the particular subject, and
that the subject-criterion and the essence-criterion must pick out the same candidate. If Chapter 6 is to advance his
argument, he must explain how a particular can be identical to its essence.
He must therefore explain how the essence can be a particular. For, as Aristotle conceives identity, identical things
must come to be and perish at the same time (cf. 1003b29–30); but a universal exists in more than one particular, and
therefore is not necessarily destroyed when any one particular is destroyed. Aristotle's conception of essence, then,
must allow particular as well as universal essences. And indeed he seems to recognize them both, when he says, ‘ . . .
the substance of one thing is one, and things whose substance is numerically one are numerically one’ (1040b17).43
Since what is numerically one is a particular, and ‘substance of ’ here means ‘essence of ’, Aristotle implies that there are
particular essences.
A particular essence cannot be the same as an essential property. Socrates' essential properties are all those whose
instantiation constitutes the continued existence of Socrates—man, animal, and any others that may belong to Socrates
in particular. Since these universals exist even if Socrates does not, he cannot be identical to them. But it is easier to say

CHAPTER 10 § 118

219

he is identical to the particular instances of these universals that correspond to his essential properties; for his existence
consists in the existence of these particular instances.

118. Essence as Subject
If this is Aristotle's conception of particular essences, then his claim that a particular is identical to its particular essence
seems plausible, even unexciting. His arguments for the identity of subject and essence are fairly obscure, but their
point is reasonably clear.44 He argues that if something is an object of knowledge, and to know it is to know its essence,
then its essence cannot be different from it (1031b6–7, 20–2). This claim is not simply that knowing the essence is a
means to knowing the subject (as knowing about quadrilaterals might be a means to knowing about squares). Aristotle
claims that the knowledge of x is just knowledge of what x is, the essence of x, and it is hard to see how knowledge of
x could consist wholly in knowledge of something else, y; for x and y will have different properties, and our knowledge
of y will leave out some properties of x or include some properties that x lacks.
A further argument shows that some things must be identical to their essences on pain of an inﬁnite regress
(1031b28–1032a4). The absurdity of taking the essence to be non-identical to its bearer appears if we give the essence a
name—suppose we call the essence of F ‘EF’. We then have to ask what the essence of EF is; and when we ﬁnd this
(call it ‘EEF’) we can ask what the essence of EEF is, and so on (1031b28–30). Once we see the absurdity of the result
we may say that EF is really just the same as EEF; but then why should we not admit from the start that F is identical
to EF? We have been forced into absurdity by the assumption that the essence of something cannot be identical to its
bearer.
The argument so far seems to imply that any knowable subject is the same as its essence. It is rather surprising, then,
that Aristotle seems to limit the conclusion to primary and intrinsic things, and to reject it for coincidental things such
as musicians and pale men (1031b22–4). Why should a pale man not also be the same as the essence of pale man?
Aristotle does not, however, really deny that the pale man is identical to his essence, if that claim is properly
understood; he claims that the pale man is not identical to his own essence, in so far as the essence he is identical to is
partly the essence of something else (the man).45 The arguments about primary subjects in Chapter 4 help to elucidate
this claim. The pale man's existence and survival consist partly in the existence and survival of something else, the
man; and he is different from the pale man in so far as he can exist and survive without

220

CHAPTER 10 § 119

remaining pale. In Chapter 4 Aristotle describes this difference by saying that the man has an essence in the primary
way. In Chapter 6 he describes the same difference by saying that the man is identical to his essence, whereas the pale
man depends for his essence on the essence of the man who is not essentially pale. Both arguments isolate the primary
subjects and the primary essences.
Aristotle reasonably concludes that the primary essences belong to ‘species of genera’ (1030a11–14), because these are
the genuine kinds of things that exist, and their members are the genuine instances of coming to be and perishing.46 We
think there is good reason to recognize horses rather than pale horses or pale things as natural kinds. If the pale horse
‘perishes’ and the horse does not perish, we say that nothing has really perished, and that the alleged perishing is just an
alteration in a more basic subject. In saying this we assume that more important laws and regularities are associated
with something's being and remaining a horse than with its being and remaining pale or a pale horse. A subject that is
identical to its own essence, and does not depend on the essence of anything else, undergoes genuine coming to be and
perishing; its coming into existence and going out of existence are not merely an alteration of some more basic subject.
If a subject does not depend on some more basic subject for its coming to be and perishing, then it has an essence, and
indeed is an essence, in its own right. Hence it is not spoken of ‘by one thing being said of another’; and so it counts as
a subject according to the narrow predication-formula, which gives the preferred interpretation of the subject-criterion.
Particular essences turn out to be basic subjects.

119. The Progress of the Argument
Aristotle has argued that the claim of essence to be substance is well founded, and that it supports the claim of the
subject to be substance. Essence was introduced with the universal and the genus, in contrast to the subject
(1028b34–5); and so we might have thought it would support different candidates for substance. Aristotle claims that
in fact it supports the same candidates, since the primary subjects are identical to their essences. If we ask what
something really is, what its essence is, the answer may pick out an item in any of the categories—this is why Aristotle
allows essences for non-substances. But if we ask what things in general really are, we look for some basic underlying
item. The Presocratics were searching inarticulately for this; and Aristotle argues that this search for essence brings us
back to basic subjects. The

CHAPTER 10 § 119

221

connexion between basic subjects and essences becomes clear when we inquire into either of them.47
The strategy suggested by this argument explains how Aristotle goes beyond ordinary dialectic. In Metaphysics iv he
insisted that we must recognize basic subjects that are the same when different properties are truly predicated of them.
In vii 6 he adds that these basic subjects are identical to their essences, and suggests more clearly how the essences are
to be identiﬁed. He follows common beliefs in choosing putative examples of substances (cf. 1029a33–4), but he does
not assume that they are really substances. Equally, he has endorsed form as the successful candidate for substance,
and so has implied that it satisﬁes both the subject-criterion and the essence-criterion. But he has shown neither that
the forms he recognizes satisfy these criteria, nor that they coincide with the commonsense examples of substances.
They count as substances only if they correspond to natural kinds embodying signiﬁcant laws and regularities.
Aristotle, then, has not yet justiﬁed the claim of one or another candidate to be substance. Still, he has shown what is
needed to justify the claim. Metaphysical argument shows that we must look for persisting subjects, and that these
must be identical to essences that correspond to natural kinds. The Analytics insisted that a genuine subject must have
essential properties that explain its other properties.48 If the Metaphysics observes this requirement, it should argue that
the favoured subjects have the right explanatory properties. But to say which subjects these are we apparently need
more than the abstract metaphysical argument of Book iv.
By the end of vii 6 Aristotle has suggested how ﬁrst philosophy might solve the puzzles about substance that are raised
by his own and other people's views. In looking for the type of being presupposed by the special sciences, we ﬁnd that
we must recognize persistent subjects with essences. In considering the puzzles about substance as subject and as
essence, we see that they are really puzzles about the very questions that are raised by the study of being qua being. For
our intuitive distinction between men and musicians, and our intuitive belief that substances must be subjects, thises,
and essences, are explained on the assumption that we are looking for the basic persistent subjects that ﬁrst philosophy
tells us to look for.
So far, we have not found out what these subjects and essences are. Indeed, we may be inclined to make a typical
complaint about the early stages of an argument that ‘makes a new start’, according to dialectical rules. In his
discussion of happiness Aristotle remarks: ‘But, presumably, to say that happiness is the best good is apparently
something

222

CHAPTER 10 § 119

agreed, and we still feel the lack of a clearer statement of what it is’ (EN 1097b22–4). A parallel complaint applies at
the end of vii 6. Aristotle wants to provide the clearer account; but he also thinks the apparently ‘agreed’ ﬁrst steps
should not be neglected, or dismissed as platitudes, and that they will help us to reach the clearer account.

11 Essence and Form
120. Substance and Potentiality
In Metaphysics vii 1–6 Aristotle argues for the coincidence of the subject-criterion and the essence-criterion, and for the
identiﬁcation of substances with primary subjects. He does not conﬁne himself, however, to these general arguments
about criteria. He also suggests that form is substance; and if the two criteria coincide, form must be both a particular
basic subject and a primary essence. To support this suggestion, he must say more about what form is, and about why
it meets both criteria. Especially he must show why it is the sort of explanatory property that is the essence of a basic
subject.
At the beginning of vii 13 Aristotle thinks he has done this; for he claims to have shown that a form is a this. He
assumes some controversial conclusions, however. For he summarizes his argument by saying that in one case the
matter is the subject for the actuality (1038b6); he speaks of actuality, without explanation, when we expect him to
speak of form. No explanation is given in vii 7–12, which do not connect form with actuality. An explanation is given,
however, in viii–ix; Aristotle defends the identiﬁcation of matter with potentiality and form with actuality. If we
examine this defence before we discuss the rest of the argument in vii, we can also see an important part of the
argument for identifying form with essence, and hence with substance.
First, Aristotle has good reasons for identifying the essence of a substance, and so the substance itself, with its
persistent potentialities. In Physics i he assumes that changes are not random, but all involve the action of one thing on
another (Phys. 188a31–4) according to deﬁnite laws and regularities. This determinist assumption suggests that our
description of the elements of the change should pick out the properties involved in the laws explaining the change.
Aristotle argues that change requires contraries and a subject, but he does not make it clear why the subject is needed,
and how it must be described.
The description he offers is inadequate. For he speaks as though the subject's role in the change is explained by its
possession of contrary properties at different times; but the contraries do not properly explain the change. It is
insufﬁcient to say, for instance, that a man became musical from being unmusical, since his being unmusical does not

224

CHAPTER 11 § 120

explain the change to being musical; he might be entirely unmusical because he is tone-deaf and cannot learn music. A
man's potentiality for music is the persistent feature of him that explains why he, rather than the tone-deaf man,
becomes musical. But though Aristotle should appeal to potentiality, and though he recognizes its relevance to the
analysis of change (191b27–9), he does not see its importance for his claims.1
What is missing in Physics i is more clearly present in Metaphysics iv, in Aristotle's discussion of Protagoras.2 Protagoras
wants to accommodate appearances by allowing things to change enough to make all appearances true. In allowing
this, though, he still claims to recognize continuing subjects undergoing the changes. Aristotle replies that Protagoras
gives us no reason to suppose that the alleged subject of all the changes in a Protagorean world is really a continuing
subject. If it is a continuing subject, it must have the same persistent traits, lasting from one change to the next and
making it capable of undergoing both changes; and these persistent traits are its essential properties. Since these
persistent traits are potentialities (making the subject capable of undergoing the changes), Aristotle's initial concern
with persistent subjects and their essences leads him naturally to a concern with potentiality.3
If we see the connexion between potentialities and persisting subjects of change, we can also see why some subjects
(e.g. men) are more genuine subjects than others (e.g. musical men). A persistent subject needs a persistent potentiality
explaining the changes that happen to it. If we ﬁnd that rather little is explained by reference to permanent
potentialities of musical men as such, and more is explained by reference to permanent potentialities of men as such,
we have some reason for thinking that men are more genuine subjects than musical men are. Aristotle claims in
Metaphysics vii 4–6 that some, but not all, apparent subjects are thises and primary subjects, identical to their essences. If
the persistence of explanatory potentialities determines the basic subjects and essences, an account of potentialities
should help us to see which essences and which subjects satisfy his conditions.
For these reasons we expect the essence of a persistent subject to be at least partly constituted by its persistent
potentialities for change. If, then, the primary subjects that are substances are identical to their essences, they should be
at least partly identical to their persistent potentialities. Moreover, if form is to be identiﬁed with essence and subject, it
should be some sort of potentiality.

CHAPTER 11 § 121

225

121. Substance and Actuality
Another part of Aristotle's argument, however, seems to lead in a different direction; for in viii 2 he identiﬁes
substance with actuality (1042b9–11). To provide an analogy with substance (1043a5–7), he mentions different nonsubstances that come to be when a piece of matter is changed in the appropriate way for the resulting product. A
threshold results when a block of stone is put in the right place; a breakfast results when a roll of bread is put on the
table at the right time of day; a box results when planks are hammered together, and so on. In each instance the
product is deﬁned by the modiﬁcation of the matter (1042b25–31). These cases provide an analogy with substance:
From what we have said, it evidently follows, then, that if substance is the cause of a thing's being, we should seek
the cause of each thing's being in these 〈differentiae〉. Though none of them is substance even when combined
〈with matter〉, still it is analogous 〈to substance〉 in each case; and just as in substances, what is predicated of
the matter is the actuality itself, so also in other deﬁnitions 〈what is predicated〉 is most of all 〈the actuality〉.
(1043a2–7)
The actuality that results from the modiﬁcation of stone is stone placed on the ground before a front door; and this is
the cause of its being a threshold.
These examples show how the contrast between matter and form corresponds to the contrast between potentiality and
actuality. We ﬁnd something's constituents, and the modiﬁcation or arrangement that actualizes them in this particular
thing; and then we have found the matter and the form. The examples support Aristotle's identiﬁcation of form with
actuality, in vii 13 (1038b6); in contrast to the matter, identiﬁed with potentiality (1042b9–10), he identiﬁes the form
with the state resulting from the modiﬁcation of the matter.
But though it is easy to see why form is identiﬁed with actuality, it becomes difﬁcult to see how it could be identiﬁed
with the primary essence or basic subject. Identiﬁcation of actuality with form, and of form with substance, seems to
imply too general a conception of form, and too lax a standard for being a substance. Breakfast is the modiﬁcation or
actuality of a roll that consists in its being served for a morning meal. If this is all I normally have for breakfast, but one
day I leave it and it is served again for lunch, it is no longer breakfast. If actuality and form are substance, we must say
that one substance, the breakfast, has perished, and another, the lunch, has come into being. Clearly, however, we
believe there is only one continuing substance, the roll, that has simply acquired a new temporal property. If, however,
the roll had been made into crumbs after breakfast time, and the crumbs

226

CHAPTER 11 § 122

put in the stufﬁng served at lunch, the roll would have been destroyed even though the crumbs still existed.
The introduction of potentiality and actuality revives the questions that arose about such ‘coincidental combinations’ as
musicians. The musician actualizes a potentiality of a man, but Aristotle does not count him as a new substance. On
the other hand, he does count a human being as a new substance because he actualizes a potentiality of ﬂesh and bone.
In counting such things as human beings as substances Aristotle rejects Democritus' claim (alluded to in 1042b11–15),
that the only substances are atoms, and other apparent substances are mere coincidental combinations of atoms. But
since Democritus simply applies to men the sort of analysis that Aristotle applies to musicians, Aristotle should explain
how the two cases are different.
He should not simply appeal, as we did in discussing the roll, to intuitions and common beliefs about when some new
subject has or has not come into being.4 Such an appeal is characteristic of pure dialectic; but in the Metaphysics Aristotle
insists that ﬁrst philosophy must go beyond pure dialectic, and argue scientiﬁcally about how things really are. He
needs to say, therefore, apart from intuitions about substance and genuine becoming, which actualities indicate
substances and which do not.
It is initially difﬁcult, then, to see how Aristotle can identify actuality with form and substance; and even if his
argument succeeds, he must still reconcile its conclusion with our apparent reasons for identifying substance with
potentiality. He seeks to remove these difﬁculties by explaining potentiality and actuality more fully, and restricting
them in ways that allow the right connexions with matter and form.

122. Potentiality
Aristotle sees that he must restrict the range of potentiality and actuality. In his initial series of examples he assumes,
for instance, that breakfast is an actuality of this roll. Putting the roll on the breakfast table certainly realizes a
possibility for the roll; and so it clearly actualizes a potentiality of the roll if possibility is sufﬁcient for potentiality.
Aristotle, however, denies this account of the connexion between possibility and potentiality, and mentions three cases
where he thinks it gives us the wrong result:
1. If it is possible for x to change into y and for y to change into z, then it is possible for x to change into z. And if
possibility for change makes one thing the matter of another, it will follow that if x is the matter of y and y of z,
then x is the matter of z. But Aristotle disagrees:

CHAPTER 11 § 123

227

‘We must state the most proximate causes. For instance, what is the matter 〈of a man〉? Not ﬁre or earth, but
the special matter’ (1044b1–3).
2. If possibility for change to F implies potentiality for F, then if it is possible for x to become F and possible for x
to become the contrary of F, x has the two potentialities. But Aristotle denies that a normal body is potentially
both healthy and sick:
There is a puzzle about how the matter is related to contraries. If, for instance, a body is potentially healthy, and
illness is contrary to health, is the body therefore potentially both? And is water potentially both wine and vinegar?
Perhaps it is the matter of one contrary by having its own 〈proper〉 state and form, and of the other by being
unnaturally deprived and corrupted. (1044b29–34)
3. If possibility implies potentiality, and potentiality and actuality are matter and form, it follows that x is potentially
y and y is the form of x even if the coming into being of y involves the destruction of x. Aristotle rejects the
conclusion:
And there is also a puzzle about why wine is not the matter of vinegar, or potentially vinegar, even though vinegar
comes from wine, and about why a living man is not potentially a corpse. Perhaps the corruptions are coincidental
〈to being wine or being a man〉, and the matter of the animal is itself the potentiality and matter of the corpse by
being corrupted, and so also in the case of water and vinegar; for in these cases one thing comes from another
〈only〉 in the way night comes from day. And when things change into each other in this way, they must revert to
matter; if, e.g., an animal comes from a corpse, the corpse must turn into 〈more elementary〉 matter, and then
into an animal; and the vinegar must ﬁrst turn into water and then into wine. (1044b34–1045a6)
Since the substance has to revert to matter, Hotspur ‘becomes’ food for worms (only in the way that day ‘becomes
night’, without persisting) only after ﬁrst becoming a corpse.5
These results all assume that potentiality is just possibility, and that every realization of a possibility also actualizes a
potentiality. If Aristotle can show that this is the wrong conception of potentiality, he can perhaps also defend his
identiﬁcation of substance with actuality, if the apparent examples of actuality without substance rest on the wrong
conception of potentiality.

123. Potentiality and Possibility
Some of Aristotle's reasons for restricting the range of potentiality reﬂect its role in the explanation of change. This
role becomes clear in his criticism of the Megarians in ix 3; for it is the role that their view of

228

CHAPTER 11 § 123

potentiality has to deny. The Megarians' doubts advance Aristotle's argument in the same way as his opponents' doubts
advanced it in Book iv; and indeed he sees a close connexion between the Megarian and the Protagorean position. He
takes the Megarian doctrine to imply that nothing ever has any unactualized potentialities, since everything is incapable
of doing anything except what it is actually doing. He accuses the Megarians of accepting a Protagorean conception of
things; for on their view things will not be perceptible or have perceptible qualities except when they are actually being
perceived (1047a4–6). Neither the Megarians nor Protagoras can say what makes something a persistent subject
receiving different changes, or why this subject is capable of some changes and not of others; for to say these things
they would have to recognize something with a stable nature of its own apart from its appearances on different
occasions.6
Since reference to potentiality explains changes by reference to features of the subject itself, we have reason to say that
its potentialities have changed only if it has itself changed: on this view, if x is capable of F at t, and nothing changes in
x between t and t1, then x is still capable of F at t1. Between t and t1 the external circumstances may have changed so
that x will no longer F, but Aristotle insists that these changes should not be treated as a change in potentiality, since
they involve no change in the subject (1046b36–1047a4). The Megarians have to say that when we are not actually
seeing, we lose the potentiality to see, and therefore become blind; but in treating potentialities this way, they miss the
point of ascribing potentialities to subjects.7
The reasons for rejecting the Megarian view of potentiality are also reasons for Aristotle to deny the equivalence of
possibility and potentiality; for purely external changes can make something impossible for a subject without changing
the subject itself, and some possibilities may be open for a subject without corresponding to any appropriate
permanent state. The point of Aristotle's conception is clearer when we see why he believes that possibility is neither
necessary nor sufﬁcient for potentiality.8
The agent has the potentiality to act on the patient when the patient is in the right conditions.
Necessarily, then, when any subject with a rational potentiality desires 〈to produce an effect〉 for which it has a
potentiality, and in the way it has it, it produces 〈the effect〉. It has the potentiality to produce 〈the effect〉
when the patient is present and is in a certain state; otherwise it will not be capable of producing it. We need not add
the condition ‘if nothing external prevents it’; for it has the potentiality in the way in which it is a potentiality of
producing, and it is a potentiality for producing not in all conditions, but in certain conditions, which exclude the
presence of external hindrances, since these are excluded

CHAPTER 11 § 123

229

when some of the conditions mentioned in the deﬁnition are present. Hence even if at the same time one has a wish
or an appetite to produce two effects or to produce contraries, one will not produce them. For that is not the way in
which one has a potentiality for them, nor is it a potentiality of producing them both at the same time; for it will
produce 〈the effects〉 it is capable of 〈only〉 in this way, 〈which precludes producing them both at the same
times〉. (1048a13–24)
To say that the agent has the potentiality ‘to produce the effect when the patient is present and in a certain state’ is to
describe the potentiality that the agent has all the time (as long as it does not change), even when the patient is not
present or not in the right state.
This description of the potentiality does not restrict the times at which the agent has the potentiality to those at which
the patient is present and in the right state.9 If Aristotle did intend to restrict, by reference to these external conditions,
the times at which I have my potentiality, then my potentiality would be relatively transient, and I would lose it when
the external conditions changed, even if I did not change.10 Aristotle, however, intends the clause about external
conditions to deﬁne a permanent state I have even when external conditions prevent its exercise. If I am a builder, but
I lose all my tools and cannot replace them for a week, then for a week it is impossible for me to build; but since I do
not change, I do not lose my potentiality to build.11
Rational potentialities (e.g. the skill of a craftsman) show why possibility is not only unnecessary, but also insufﬁcient,
for potentiality; for Aristotle argues that these potentialities must be acquired by having been previously exercised
(1047b31–5; cf. EN 1103a26–b2, EE 1220b2–3). In this previous exercise I perform an action for which I have not
yet acquired the potentiality; if I perform the action, it must have been possible for me to perform it. Possibility,
therefore, cannot be sufﬁcient for potentiality.
Aristotle's assumption about potentiality is defensible. If I am thrown into the water, and manage a couple of
swimming strokes to get to the side, I have the potentiality for self-preservation, and I exercise it by swimming to the
side. It was because my action was self-preservation, not because it was swimming, that some persistent state of mine
explained why I did it then. No persistent state equipping me to swim is needed to explain my action; and so it does
not actualize a potentiality for swimming. Trained swimmers, however, have a potentiality to swim, not just to preserve
their lives, because it is the fact that they are swimming that explains why they do it. They have been trained for
swimming, not (except coincidentally) for saving their lives or making money. If this is how Aristotle understands
potentiality, then he can fairly deny that actual swimming requires a potentiality to swim.12

230

CHAPTER 11 § 124

Potentiality requires more than mere possibility, because it requires reference to a permanent state of the subject that
explains the actuality in question.

124. Degrees of Potentiality
A subject's potentiality for some actuality is a relatively permanent state of the subject explaining the actuality.
Potentialities will differ, then, in so far as they explain actualities in different ways and to different degrees. We saw that
Aristotle does not think I have a potentiality to swim just because it is possible for me to swim; for in this case the
potentiality for swimming is not the state that explains my swimming. The more closely the potentiality is connected
with a determinate actuality, the more reasonable it is to offer the potentiality as an explanation of that actuality.
Aristotle clariﬁes ‘closeness’ and ‘connexion’ by introducing degrees of potentiality.
We must also make distinctions about potentiality and actuality, since just now we were speaking of them without
〈the appropriate〉 qualiﬁcations. One sort of knowledge is what we mean in saying that human beings know
because they are the kind of things that know and have knowledge; another is what we mean in saying that the
person who has grammatical knowledge knows. These are capable in different ways—the ﬁrst because they have
the right sort of genus and matter, the second because he can attend to something when he wishes, if nothing
external prevents it. A third sort is what we have when we are attending to something, actualizing our knowledge
and fully knowing (e.g.) this A. In the ﬁrst and second case we pass from potentially to actually knowing; but in the
ﬁrst case we do so by being altered through learning, and by frequent changes from the contrary state, while in the
second case, of passing from having without actualizing arithmetical or geometrical knowledge to actualizing it, we
do so in another way. (DA 417a21–b2)
Having a suitable genus and matter for knowing French is a fairly remote potentiality (something parallel to what we
mean in speaking of a ‘remote possibility’), since it does not itself explain my competent speaking of French0. The
speaking is explained by my more proximate potentiality, which is present when I have learnt to speak French.
To convert a remote into a proximate potentiality, learning or training or growth is required; but to actualize a
proximate potentiality no further learning is needed (417a32–b12). Actualization requires only the right external
condition (in the case of seeing) or this together with the agent's desire (in the case of rational potentialities).
These differences show why a proximate potentiality explains more

CHAPTER 11 § 125

231

of an actuality than a remote potentiality explains. To explain someone's being a carpenter by appeal to her remote
potentialities (cf. 417b31–2) is not completely useless; for being a carpenter involves the realization of some of her
natural skills and talents, and if she had not had these, she could not have become a carpenter, or would not have
become the sort of carpenter she is. But since these natural capacities could have been left unactualized, or actualized
in other skills besides a carpenter's, appeal to her natural talents does not explain why she has actualized them in this
particular sort of skill. To this extent my potentiality to be a carpenter is more remote than my potentiality to have
some knowledge (of which carpentry is a possible example).
A proximate potentiality, on the other hand, explains much more of the actuality, leaving less to be explained by
external conditions. A normal animal has a natural ability to see, needing only an external object in the right conditions
if it is to be actualized; to explain why it sees this object we need to say why this object rather than some other is present,
but to explain why it sees we need only refer to the natural ability and the presence of a suitable object. The more
proximate the potentiality we appeal to, the more determinate the features of the actuality we can explain by it. Since
we investigate potentialities in order to explain actualities by appeal to persistent states of the subject, we have good
reason to identify as many proximate potentialities of the subject as we can.

125. Proximate Potentiality
Aristotle refuses to describe the actualization of a proximate potentiality as a mere alteration.
Nor is there just one way of being affected. While the ﬁrst type is a destruction of contrary by contrary, the other
type is preservation, not destruction, of a potential F by an actual F, when the potential F is 〈not contrary, but〉
like the actual F, as a potentiality is like its actuality. For the second case, in which the possessor of knowledge
comes to attend to his knowledge, is either not alteration at all—since the addition leads to 〈the knowledge〉
itself, and to the actuality—or else it is a different kind of alteration. That is why we should not speak of alteration in
the intelligent subject whenever it exercises its intelligence, any more than we should speak of it in the builder
whenever he is building. Hence, ﬁrst, if the understanding and intelligent subject is led from being so potentially to
being so actually, we should call this something other than teaching. (417b2–12)
The description of the actualization as a mere alteration leaves out an essential feature of it—the fact that the
proximate potentiality explains

232

CHAPTER 11 § 125

the actualization. Learning, by contrast, involves alteration of the subject; to explain why I know French it is not
enough to appeal to my natural linguistic ability, but we must also appeal to other changes that are not themselves
explained by that ability (my having been taught French as opposed to Spanish, for instance).
Still, the same principles that distinguish actualization of a proximate potentiality from learning also distinguish
learning from mere alteration; and so Aristotle introduces this as a second case:
Again, if a subject with potential knowledge learns and acquires knowledge from a teacher with actual knowledge,
then we should either say that this is not a case of being affected, or that there are two ways of being
altered—change into a condition of deprivation, and change into possession of a state and into 〈the fulﬁlment of
the subject's〉 nature. (417b12–16)13
Though I have no proximate potentiality for speaking French, I have a proximate potentiality for learning a language
that I can actualize only by learning some particular language, and my learning French (or German or English)
actualizes this proximate potentiality. By contrast, my becoming pale or tanned does not actualize a proximate
potentiality; I am not naturally organized for acquiring a particular skin colour, though my natural constitution and
environment make it possible for me to become pale or tanned. In this case the transition is merely an alteration; for it
is not the actualization of a potentiality for becoming pale or tanned, though it is certainly the realization of a
possibility.
These distinctions show why Aristotle has good reason to deny that possibility is sufﬁcient for potentiality. A
potentiality for seeing is supposed to explain why an animal sees; seeing is one of the activities that the animal is for.
Equally, seeing explains the potentiality for seeing, since the animal is constituted as it is so that it can see. Aristotle's
teleology shows him how to identify the proximate natural potentialities; and since he is looking for these, he rightly
denies that possibility is sufﬁcient for potentiality. A creature's nature leaves many possibilities open to it, but only
some of them reﬂect its natural potentialities. If its seeing is explained by the presence of organs and traits whose
presence is in turn explained by the fact that they result in seeing, then it has the potentiality for seeing.14 It is equally
possible for the creature to go blind; but nothing about it is explained by the fact that it results in blindness; it therefore
has no potentiality for going blind.
The same grounds for distinguishing potentiality from possibility explain a distinctive feature of rational potentialities.
Every potentiality involving reason is one and the same potentiality for both contraries, whereas every nonrational
potentiality is from just one contrary; what is hot, e.g., is only the potentiality to heat, whereas medical science is the

CHAPTER 11 § 126

233

potentiality to produce both illness and health. This is because scientiﬁc knowledge is a rational account (logos), and
the same rational account makes clear both the thing and its privation (though not in the same way), so that in a way
it is 〈the science〉 of both contraries, but in a way it is the science of the 〈positive〉 property, rather than of the
privation. Every such science therefore must also be of contraries, but must be in itself the science of one contrary
〈the positive property〉, and not in itself the science of the 〈privation〉. For the rational account is of one thing
in itself, and of the other coincidentally, in a way; for it makes clear the contrary by denial and removal, since the
contrary is the primary privation, and the privation is the removal of the 〈positive property〉. (1046b4–15)
The potentiality is for the actuality that explains its presence; since doctors learn about drugs because they are useful
for healing, not because they are useful for poisoning, the potentiality they acquire is for healing, no matter how they
use it. As Plato insists, the doctor ‘on the exact account’ is a healer not a money-maker, even though the doctor makes
money (Rep. 342d2–7). In Aristotle's terms, doctors become capable only coincidentally of the other things they
become able to do in learning to be doctors.15

126. Conditions for Potentiality
Similar reasons explain Aristotle's denial of the transitivity of potentiality. Possibility seems to be transitive; if at t1 it is
possible for x to become F at t2, and if becoming F at t2 makes it possible for x to become G at t3, then at t1 it is
possible for x to become G at t3. If, for instance, it is possible for children to grow up and enter a university, and once
they enter a university it is possible for them to graduate, then it is possible all along for them to graduate from a
university when they grow up. But Aristotle rejects the parallel inference for potentialities.
The point of his denial is clearest in the examples of production by a craft (1049a5–12). He allows that building
materials are potentially a house only when they are all complete and nothing needs to be added, removed, or changed,
and they are all ready for the building craft to be applied to them. If the materials are at an earlier stage, and still need
the brickmaker's, woodcutter's, and glass-maker's crafts applied to them, Aristotle denies that they are potentially a
house, even though it is possible for them to be made into a house. At this stage they are potentially bricks, not
potentially a house.16
Since natural processes and conditions have an internal, not an external, cause, the account of potentiality is different.
We must distinguish when a thing is potentially, and when it is not, since it is

234

CHAPTER 11 § 126

not potentially at just any time. For example, is earth potentially a man, or not? Is it so when it has already become
seed, or perhaps not even then? (1048b37–1049a3)
〈When the origin of becoming〉 is in the subject itself, 〈it is potentially〉 whatever it will be of itself if nothing
external prevents it. For example, the seed is not yet 〈potentially a man〉, since it must 〈be put〉 in something
else and changed; but whenever through an origin in itself it is such, then it is potentially a man. In its ﬁrst
condition, it needs another origin 〈outside itself〉, just as earth is not yet potentially a statue, since it must change
to become bronze. (1049a13–18)17
The process or condition is to be explained by the result that will come about from an origin in the subject itself, not by
some other result.
Earth is not potentially a man before it is changed, because becoming a man is irrelevant to its movements. Becoming
a man is relevant only when earth is suitably combined with other things to produce something with a different nature.
A seed is closer to being a man, but not close enough. Before it is united with an egg, its tendency to become a man
does not explain how it behaves; though a possible causal sequence will result in a man, the result is not relevant to the
seed's origin of change. With organisms the only thing that fulﬁls the conditions for potentiality is the body of the
actual organism; nothing else will be of the right sort through itself and through its own origin of change.
Aristotle infers that matter has life potentially only if it is the natural organic body whose actuality is the soul (DA
412a19–22). This body belongs to a normal natural organism that is actually alive; and such a body already has actual
life, needing no further changes to make it actually alive. If the only thing that is potentially a living organism is the
subject whose movements are for the activities of a living organism, then only the body of a living organism satisﬁes
this condition. The characteristics and behaviour of the seed and embryo are explained by reference to their
development into an organic body; they are therefore potential organic bodies (412b26–7), but they are not potentially
the organisms that have these bodies.18
By arguing that not every possibility corresponds to a potentiality Aristotle has shown that his claims about potentiality
are not arbitrary, but reﬂect further claims about the proper explanatory states. If these claims support the recognition
of potentialities, they also support his attempt to identify matter and form with potentiality and actuality. If every
realization of a possibility corresponds to a new substance, a man becomes a new substance when he becomes pale,
and a roll becomes a new substance when it is put out for breakfast; but Aristotle need not recognize all these
substances, since he identiﬁes form with actualization of potentiality, not with realization of possibility, and the
possibilities in

CHAPTER 11 § 127

235

these cases are not potentialities. Some changes, e.g. becoming musical, actualize genuine potentialities, but leave
enough of the subject's previous potentialities undisturbed so that they do not imply the existence of a new substance.
By appealing to his restricted conception of potentiality Aristotle shows he has some systematic, non-arbitrary reason
for denying that these are new substances.
The same restrictions on potentiality allow an answer to one difﬁculty in identifying matter with potentiality. If
potentiality is simply possibility, then wine is potentially vinegar and a man is potentially a corpse or food for worms. If,
however, we restrict potentialities in the way Aristotle suggests, we need not recognize these odd potentialities. It is
certainly possible to make wine sour, to get vinegar. But this happens because the wine is ﬁrst changed; and it is
changed because it has this material constitution, not because it has the form of wine. In the same way it is not the
form of a man that explains why he becomes a corpse; he becomes a corpse, and then food for worms, because of his
matter, not because of his form. Hence we need not agree that a man is potentially a corpse; and we need not reject the
identiﬁcation of matter with potentiality.

127. Potentiality Without Change
If the explanatory character of potentialities distinguishes them from possibilities, it is reasonable to identify a
continuing subject with its continuing potentialities. Aristotle identiﬁes potentiality with matter, and form with
actuality; but if potentialities are potentialities for change, then actuality, and therefore form, will be some sort of
change. This is an unwelcome result for Aristotle, since he identiﬁes form with substance, and therefore with some
sort of persistent subject. If the account of potentiality and actuality is to support his claims about form and substance,
he needs to loosen the connexion between potentiality and change, and to show that an actuality may be a persistent
state rather than a change or episode.
To loosen this connexion, he remarks that the potentiality involving change is not the most useful one for his purposes
(1045b36–1046a2), and turns to potentialities for static actualities; for these include the relation of matter and
substance (1048b6–9). He argues that F is a proximate potentiality of the subject x for the actuality G if (1) F is a
permanent trait of x, making G possible for x in the right conditions, and explaining why G happens, and (2) G also
explains why x has F, so that x has F for G.
This account of potentiality and actuality extends them in the

236

CHAPTER 11 § 127

direction Aristotle wants; for these relations are present not only when x has to change to being G, but also when x is F
and G at the same time. Perhaps, for instance, x is G because its constitution is F, so that F makes G possible as the
material cause makes a result possible. But equally, the fact that G results from being F explains why x is F, so that G is
the ﬁnal cause of F. Since this relation holds in artifacts and in natural organisms, potentiality and actuality apply here
also.19 A block of stone is a (non-proximate) potential statue before it is carved; but even after it has been carved it still
has the appropriate relation to the statue, and is a (proximate) potential statue, even though it now constitutes an actual
statue.
The extension of potentiality and actuality from change to conditions involving no change implies that they may
express simultaneous, not successive, states of the same subject, by describing the same subject in two different
aspects. The statue is an actuality of how the bronze previously was, but also of how it now is, as a constituent of the
statue; for the bronze is in its present condition in order to constitute a statue. The potentiality and the actuality are two
distinct aspects of the same subject. Hence Aristotle suggests that once we understand potentiality and actuality we will
see why form and matter are one (1045b17–23; DA 412b6–9).
The example of some artifacts shows how it is reasonable to identify an actuality with a stable condition of a subject.
The question is more complicated with organisms (and with some machines), since their existence essentially involves
change, and many of their vital activities are intermittent. Aristotle therefore identiﬁes substance and form with ﬁrst
actuality, the permanent state of the organism, as opposed to the intermittent vital activities.
Actuality is spoken of in two ways—as 〈the state of〉 knowing or as 〈the activity of〉 studying. Evidently, then,
the soul is the sort of actuality that knowing is. For both being asleep and being awake require the presence of the
soul, and being awake corresponds to studying, and being asleep to the state of inactive knowing; moreover, in the
same subject the state of knowing precedes the activity. Hence the soul is the ﬁrst actuality of a body that has life
potentially. (DA 412a22–8)
In relation to matter this permanent state is actuality, but in relation to particular vital activities it is potentiality; hence it
is second potentiality as well as ﬁrst actuality (DA 417a21–9). A living organism has a material body, a collection of
tissue, limbs, and organs, that is organized for something. We have previously suggested that it is organized for the
vital activities of the organism; but this suggestion needs to be modiﬁed, and the modiﬁcation shows why ﬁrst actuality
is needed.20

CHAPTER 11 § 128

237

To explain the particular vital activities of the organism, we must explain why they happen just when they do. The
structure and potentialities of the body do not explain this. We must refer to other events, and especially, since we are
explaining goal-directed actions, to the properties of the organism that explain them teleologically. These properties
belong to the organism's form; for its particular activities are teleologically explicable by reference to its goal-directed
properties, and especially to the particular states it has by being an appropriately organized body. The body is organized
for the permanent states that are the organism's form; hence these permanent states are the ﬁnal cause of the material
body. The particular vital activities are, from one point of view, the ﬁnal cause of the form—these are the activities it is
for. From another point of view, however, the particular activities are for the continuation of the states that are the
form; the form is not merely a potentiality for the activities.
Aristotle therefore has reason to recognize a subject, distinct from the organized material body, that has the proximate
potentiality for the vital activities. This subject is the form that coexists with the material body. He is justiﬁed in
identifying the persistent organism both with the actuality of the organized material body that is potentially alive, and
with the potentiality for the vital activities that are the episodes of its life.

128. Form as Actuality
We have followed Aristotle's account of potentiality and actuality, to see how far they clarify his claims about form, and
support his claim that form is substance.
He claims that actuality is prior in substance to potentiality, because potentiality is for the sake of actuality; we have
sight for the sake of seeing, not the other way round, and similarly ‘the matter is potential because it might reach the
form’ (1050a15), not the other way round. The traits and activities that explain teleologically the structure and
composition of some body are the actuality for which the body has the potentiality, and they are the form for which the
body is the matter.
Substances should be basic subjects, the continuants whose coming to be and perishing are substantial changes, not
merely coincidental changes in some more basic subject. In identifying substance with form and form with actuality,
Aristotle explains his view of the basic subjects. Their continuity is determined by continuity of form, not by continuity
of matter; and form is continuous when the organization, structure, and modiﬁcations of the matter are explained by
the same teleological laws.

238

CHAPTER 11 § 129

This conception of form and substance supports Aristotle's claim that substance is a cause and origin (1041a9–10).21
The substance of a house should explain why these bricks and mortar constitute a house (1041b4–9); and Aristotle
argues that the form and function are the cause, because they explain why the matter is composed and organized as it
is. The ﬁrst actuality is the ﬁnal cause, and therefore the essence and substance of the material object.
If Aristotle is right in his claim that organisms conform to these teleological laws, he has shown that common sense
and the Categories are right in recognizing such things as individual men, horses, and trees as substance. He is not
content to rely on common sense, however. He appeals to Metaphysics iv to set the metaphysical standards that
substances must satisfy; they must be basic, continuing subjects. He appeals to his own teleological conception of
nature to show that his preferred subjects conform to the sorts of laws that entitle us to regard them as basic subjects.

129. Form and Matter in Denitions
The discussion of potentiality and actuality in Book ix should now allow us to understand better the point and
presuppositions of the argument in vii 10–11. There Aristotle claims that the essence of natural organisms is their
form, not their matter; and this claim is supposed to support his eventual claim that form is a primary subject, and
therefore a primary substance. If we have understood from Book ix what the form is supposed to be, we may ﬁnd
Aristotle's claims about it more plausible.
In vii 7–9 Aristotle prefaces his discussion of form and essence with an account of the coming to be of artifacts and
natural organisms. This account suggests that the artifact or organism comes to be from preexistent form and matter,
and that what results is the compound of form and matter.22 We might infer that the essence of the artifact or organism
will also be a compound of form and matter. But this is the inference Aristotle wants to reject, or to accept only with
severe qualiﬁcations.
First he asks which parts of a thing are parts of the account, and which are only parts of the compound that consists of
the account and the matter; and he illustrates the question with a series of four examples—circle, bronze ball, snub
nose, and statue (1034b24–1035a9). Matter is clearly not meant to be part of the account of circle; for a circle is
deﬁned as a purely geometrical object whose essence is pure form.23
In this respect a circle differs from a snub nose and a bronze ball. For

CHAPTER 11 § 130

239

snubness essentially occurs in noses, and hence in ﬂesh, as its subject; and similarly a bronze ball, as such, is essentially
made of bronze. These, in contrast to the circle, are both essentially materiate universals, in so far as the account of each
includes essential reference to some type of matter. But they may not be exactly parallel examples. Snubness requires
ﬂesh, and ﬂesh has some particular chemical constitution; but does snubness require just this chemical constitution, or
does it only require matter that does what the matter constituting ﬂesh does? Matter may be part of the essence of
snubness, and of the essence of bronze ball, but in different ways.
In his fourth example Aristotle speaks of a statue as a form, matter, and compound.
If, then, there is matter, form, and the composite of these, and matter, form, and the composite of them are all
substance, then it follows that in one way matter is also called a part of something; but in another way it is not, but
only the components of the form are parts. For example, ﬂesh, the matter in which concavity comes to be, is not
part of concavity, but it is a part of snubness. Again, bronze is a part of the compound statue, but not a part of the
statue spoken of as form. For we should call the form—i.e. 〈or ‘and’; kai〉 the thing in so far as it has form—the thing
〈e.g. statue〉, but we should never call a material thing in itself 〈in so far as it is material〉 the thing 〈e.g. statue〉. This is
why the account of a circle does not include that of the segments, while the account of a syllable does include that of the letters; for the
letters are not matter, but parts of the account of the form, while the segments are parts 〈only〉 as matter in which the form comes to
be. (1035a1–12)
Apparently, a statue is properly identiﬁed with its form or with itself ‘in so far as it has form’, but not with its matter,
and, by implication, not with the compound of its form and its matter.

130. Formal and Material Essences
When Aristotle speaks without distinction of the form of the statue and of the statue in so far as it has form, he relies
on the conclusion of vii 6, where he identiﬁed the basic subjects with their essences. In his view, ‘this man's essence’
and ‘this man in so far as he has his essence’ describe exactly the same subject by reference to the same properties. In
vii 10 he considers identifying the form with the essence; hence ‘the form of the statue’ and ‘the statue as having form’
will be equivalent in the same way.24
If the statue is identical to its form, and the form is the essence (cf. 1032b1–2), it ought not to follow that the statue is
not essentially material; for statues are essentially material in a way circles are not. A

240

CHAPTER 11 § 130

non-material representation of Socrates might or might not be possible, but it surely would not be a statue of him. If
the statue is essentially material, but its essence is its form, the form must in some way include matter. The universal
statue must be materiate, since it includes essential reference to matter.
Still, if the statue is properly identical to its form, the universal statue must somehow be a form; if the universal were
matter (e.g. bronze), or compound (e.g. bronze ball), then the statue would also be identical to the matter or
compound. To support his claim that the statue is the form, Aristotle seems to distinguish a formal universal (e.g.
statue) from a compound (e.g. bronze ball). He cannot identify the bronze ball with its form, as opposed to the matter
or compound; for since it is essentially made of bronze, its essence cannot be simply being a ball, but must be being a
bronze ball. Aristotle's remarks about the statue as form imply that in one way the statue, though certainly a material
object, is more like the circle than like the bronze ball.25 He has now distinguished immateriate forms (e.g. circle),
materiate forms (e.g. statue), and materiate compounds (e.g. bronze ball).26
The statue and the snub are most like the natural substances that Aristotle has promised to discuss (1029a33–4; cf.
1042a24–6, 1043a38–b2). He often uses artifacts to illustrate natural organisms; and he uses the snub to illustrate the
appropriate pattern of deﬁnition in the study of nature (1025b30–1026a6; cf. Phys. 194a1–7, 12–17). In vii 11 he resists
the assimilation of artifacts or organisms to such compounds as bronze balls; he remarks that actual embodiment in
matter does not justify the assimilation, any more than the mere fact that all observed circles were made of bronze
would show that circles are essentially materiate (1036a31–b7).
He equally resists the opposite direction of assimilation that would treat the essences of artifacts or organisms as
immateriate forms similar to circles. This is the error of Socrates the Younger, who claimed that the ﬂesh and bones of
a human being are simply the matter in which this form happens to be present, as the immateriate form of circle
happens to be present in bronze and wood. This comparison ‘leads us away from the truth, and makes us suppose that
it is possible for a man to exist without his parts as 〈it is possible〉 for a circle 〈to exist〉 without bronze’
(1036b26–8). The universal form of a natural organism cannot be purely immateriate.
Aristotle claims, therefore, both that matter is part of a living organism's form and essence and that it is not. If he is
consistent, he appeals to different types of matter. We need to understand the difference, and we need to see if his
appeal to it supports his claim that the essence of natural organisms is their form.

CHAPTER 11 § 131

241

131. Types of Matter
Even apart from his claims about matter and deﬁnition, Aristotle's remarks about matter cannot all be true of the same
thing.
He recognizes a type of matter that cannot survive the death of the living organism. In vii 10–11 he twice mentions the
parts—hands, feet, etc.—that are the matter of an organism (1035b21, 1036b22–8), and that exist only when they fulﬁl
their function: when the organism has perished these material parts are replaced by mere homonyms (1035b14–25,
1037a30–2).27 Some of an organism's matter, however, survives the death of the organism.
For if a line is divided and destroyed into halves, and a man is destroyed into bones, sinews, and bits of ﬂesh, it does
not follow that these compose the whole as parts of the substance, but only that they compose it as its matter. They
are parts of the compound, but not of the form, which is what the account is of; that is why they are not included in
accounts either. (1035a17–22)
For this reason, the clay statue is destroyed into clay, the ball into bronze, and Callias into ﬂesh and bones.
(1035a31–3)
Since the same type of matter cannot both survive and not survive the organism, Aristotle's remarks, if they are
consistent, must refer to different types of matter.
In some contexts he explicitly recognizes different types of matter; for he remarks that in stating the matter of a man
we should mention his special matter, not ﬁre or earth, and thereby state the most proximate cause (1044b1–3).28 Let
us therefore call this the proximate matter, and contrast it with the remote matter (e.g. ﬁre, earth) that constitutes it.29 In
discussing potentialities, I have already spoken, without explicit warrant in Aristotle, of proximate and remote
potentialities; if it was right to do this, his claims about matter and about potentialities should help to explain each
other.
To show why the organic parts, rather than their chemical constituents, are proximate matter, Aristotle must show that
they provide the proximate causes; and to show this he must appeal to his doctrine of proximate potentialities. The
form is the actuality of the matter that has the potentiality for the functions that together make the form. But the
subject of the proximate potentiality is not the hand in so far as it is made of these determinate material constituents,
but the hand in so far as its material constituents are suitably combined and organized. The material parts that are parts
of the animal are those with the appropriate proximate potentialities; and these are hands in working order, not
combinations of chemical constituents (1036b30–2).30
Proximate matter, such as an arm or a leg, is always constituted by

242

CHAPTER 11 § 131

some kind of remote matter or other, since each type of limb has some deﬁnite chemical composition. But the
proximate matter has no one deﬁnite kind of chemical stuff as its matter. Different arms or legs with different
chemical constitutions may be instances of the same proximate matter of an organism.31 The same bit of stuff will
serve both as proximate and as remote matter; but the same properties are not relevant to its being proximate and to
its being remote matter. Hence if two stuffs share some properties and differ in others, they may be different types of
remote matter but the same type of proximate matter.
The connexion between proximate matter and proximate potentiality is clearest in Aristotle's conception of the body of
living creatures. This body is matter, but it is not a mass or heap or lump of remote matter. As Locke remarks, ‘ . . . in
these two cases—a mass of matter and a living body—identity is not applied to the same thing’ (Essay, ii.27.4). A soul is
the form and actuality realizing the potentialities of a material body. But the material body that has these potentialities
is itself the actuality of further material components. Legs and arms are the subjects of the proximate potentialities for
walking, gripping, and so on; and the whole body is the organic whole with the proximate potentialities for the state
that is the creature's life (conceived as ﬁrst actuality).
This is why Aristotle identiﬁes the organic body, not its chemical components, with the matter of the living creature. A
plant is a single organism, ‘which has such an organization of parts in one coherent body, partaking of one common
life’; and it keeps the same coherent body
as long as it partakes of the same life, though that life be communicated to new particles of matter vitally united to
the living plant, in a like continued organization, conformable to that sort of plants. (Locke, ii.27.5)32
This body does not outlive the creature; and the body that survives the creature's death is not the body that has the
potentiality for the creature's life (DA 412b25–6). The vital activities of the creature realize the functional properties of
its proximate matter, not the physical properties of the remote matter. The soul is the essence of the proximate, not the
remote, matter.
The distinction between proximate and remote matter explains why statues and organisms are intermediate between
circles and bronze balls. They essentially include some deﬁnite type of proximate matter, but do not essentially include
any deﬁnite type of remote matter.

CHAPTER 11 § 132

243

132. Types of Compounds
These differences between remote and proximate matter imply parallel differences in compounds. When Aristotle says
a certain kind of thing is a compound, he might refer either to a compound of form and proximate matter (a formal
compound) or to a compound of form and remote matter (a material compound). Since these two compounds have
different properties, Aristotle's apparently inconsistent claims turn out to be true of different compounds.
Some claims are plausible if and only if they refer to the formal, not the material, compound. Aristotle distinguishes
soul as form, body as matter, and the universal man as a compound of the two (1037a5–7; cf. 1035b27–31); and he
remarks that it is sometimes not clear whether the name (e.g. ‘animal’, and presumably also ‘man’) signiﬁes the
compound or the form.
Now we must realize that it is not always obvious whether a name signiﬁes the composite substance, or the actuality
and form (morphê). Does a house, e.g., signify the composite (that it is a shelter composed from bricks and stone in
this position), or does it signify the actuality and form 〈i.e. shelter〉? Is a line twoness in length, or twoness? Is an
animal a soul in a body, or a soul? For soul is the substance and actuality of a certain body; and ‘animal’ might be
applied to both 〈form and compound〉; it will be spoken of with reference to one thing, not in one account. This
question makes a difference in other areas, but not in the inquiry into perceptible substance; for the essence belongs
to the form and actuality. For soul and being soul are the same; but man and being man are not the same, unless the
soul is also to be called the man. Hence 〈being man is the same〉 as one thing 〈soul〉, but not 〈the same〉 as
another thing 〈soul plus body〉. (1043a29–b4)33
The claim about essence shows that the distinction between form and compound is unimportant only if the form and
the actuality is the essence of the compound as well as of the form. This is a defensible claim about the formal
compound. For Aristotle claims that the subject in potentiality is one and the same as the subject in actuality
(1045b17–23); and if they are the same subject, they will have the same essence. If the form is the essence of the
formal compound, and also its own essence (as it must be if it is a primary substance), then, since things that have the
same essence are identical, form and formal compound must be identical. If, as Aristotle claims, the form is also the
essence of the proximate matter (DA 412b11), the same argument will show that the form, the formal compound, and
the proximate matter are identical.
On the other hand, the form is not identical either to the remote matter or to the material compound, since its lifehistory (see 1003b29–30) is different.34 For while the proximate matter (the living, organic

244

CHAPTER 11 § 132

body) exists only in so far as the form (the ﬁrst actuality realizing the body's capacities) exists, the same is not true of
the remote matter (the chemical components), which can exist without constituting a living organism. Aristotle's claim
that the form and the compound have the same essence must, therefore, be restricted to the formal compound.
For the same reason, some of his remarks about the compound must refer to the material compound. For he contrasts
natural organisms and artifacts, on one side, with bronze balls, on the other, and treats the latter, but not the former, as
essentially compounds of form and matter; since he agrees that the former are formal compounds, he should mean
that the latter are material compounds.
Similarly, the material parts into which a man perishes (bones, ﬂesh, and sinews, 1035a18–19) are not parts of his form
and essence, and hence are not mentioned in the account of him, ‘unless the account is of the thing taken together with
matter’ (1035a23).35 These parts are the material stuffs that survive the organism, and the compound that includes
them is the material compound of form and remote matter; as Aristotle says, the essence of the material compound
will not be the same as the essence of the organism constituted by the remote matter. In this case it cannot be
unimportant whether we think we are talking of the form or of the compound; for the difference between form and
material compound is just the difference Aristotle sees between statues and bronze balls.
Aristotle claims that compounds are not identical to their essences (1037a33–b7, 1043b2–4), and in particular that man
is not the same as the essence of man, if man is taken to be the compound rather than the form (1043b2–4). We know
from vii 6 that whatever is not identical to its essence cannot be a basic subject, and therefore cannot be a substance;
and so if natural organisms are not identical to their essence, they will not be substances.
He avoids this conclusion, however, if the claims about compounds refer only to material compounds, and natural
organisms are formal rather than material compounds. Things that are not identical to their essences are ‘coincidental
compounds’, such things as musicians, that are composed of a more basic subject and a coincident of it.36 They are not
identical to their essences, since their essence depends on the essence of something else—the more basic subject. The
material compound satisﬁes this condition for being a coincidental compound; for its persistence depends on the
persistence of the form and the formal compound, but their persistence does not depend on it.
Aristotle appropriately suggests that the relation of matter to form is parallel to the relation of coincidents to their
subject (1049a27–b2); but the parallel holds only for material compounds.37 The test we have

CHAPTER 11 § 133

245

applied makes formal compounds identical to their essences, since their persistence consists in nothing more or less
than the persistence of the form that is their essence. If, then, natural organisms are formal compounds, Aristotle's
remarks about compounds and their essences do not imply that natural organisms are not identical to their essences,
and therefore do not imply that natural organisms cannot be substances.38

133. The Essence of Natural Substances
In vii 10 Aristotle identiﬁes the essence of natural organisms with forms, not with compounds of form and matter; on
the other hand he refuses to identify them with immateriate forms of the same type as circles. Our discussion of matter
and compound should now explain these claims; formal compounds are the same as materiate forms, and natural
organisms are essentially forms rather than compounds, in so far as they are essentially formal rather than material
compounds.
Aristotle argues that natural organisms are an intermediate case between immateriate forms and material compounds;
and to ﬁnd the right sort of intermediate case we must see the importance of function in the deﬁnition of natural
organisms (1035b14–25, 1036b28–32). The deﬁnition stating the essence states the form rather than the matter, since
it describes the organism by its functions rather than by its composition. However, the functional deﬁnition does not
make man analogous to circle. The functions are functions of something, actualities that actualize some potentiality;
and there must be a subject with the appropriate capacities to be actualized. Hence the deﬁnition needs to mention the
material subject whose capacities are actualized in the functions of the organism.
Aristotle therefore rejects the view of Young Socrates on the deﬁnition of natural substances:
For an animal is something that perceives, and cannot be deﬁned without motion, and hence cannot be deﬁned
without the parts in a certain condition. For the hand is not in just any condition a part of a man, but 〈the only
one that is a part is〉 the one that is capable of fulﬁlling its function, and hence the one that is ensouled; when it is
not ensouled it is not a part. (1036b28–32)39
Aristotle insists that the deﬁnition and essence must include material parts, so that the essence of man is materiate,
different from the immateriate essence of the circle, and therefore some sort of compound. Still, the deﬁnition includes
these parts only in a certain way, as deﬁned by their capacities and functions, so that the essence is a formal compound
(or materiate form) rather than a material compound.

246

CHAPTER 11 § 133

Form is the ﬁrst actuality that explains the structure and organization of the matter. In this case, perception is an
actuality of this material body, and part of its form, because it explains why this body is composed and organized as it
is. It explains these things teleologically by showing how the activities for which the body is organized are good for the
creature. If such an explanation is true, the creature must have other actualities besides perception, and in particular it
must be capable of moving itself, since the function of perception is to guide a creature's movements for its beneﬁt.
For a creature incapable of motion, perception would not have this function, and therefore would not explain its
movements; hence perception would not be part of the essence.
In the De Anima Aristotle notices this connexion between perception and the other activities of a living creature (DA
414b1–16, 415a6–7), and he relies on it in our present passage, in connecting perception with motion.40 He infers that
the essence of a natural organism is the essence of a material body, since only a material body is capable of the
appropriate sort of motion. Since the essence includes matter, it must be different from the essence of circle, which is a
pure form; therefore the universal man must be a materiate universal.
This is Aristotle's defence against Socrates the Younger. He has argued that his views on essence and actuality require
the essence of natural organisms to be actualities that essentially belong to material bodies.41 He has therefore given
reasons for claiming that natural organisms are essentially compounds of form and matter, rather than pure
immateriate forms. The relevant matter, however, is not the four elements, or even stuffs such as blood and tissue, but
the organic parts of the organism—heads, hands, etc.—that are capable of fulﬁlling their functions. These parts must
be matter (since otherwise they are irrelevant to the reply to Young Socrates), but they must be parts of the materiate
form (the formal compound), not of the (material) compound.
These claims about the essence of natural organisms help to show how form is substance (1029a32–3, recalled
1035a1–4). Aristotle argues that substance is essence, and then that form is essence; the essence of natural organisms is
their materiate form, as distinct from the material compound. His argument depends on the distinction between
proximate and remote matter, which in turn rests on his conception of potentiality.
Aristotle was right to claim, in vii 3, that form is more obscure and puzzling than matter and compound, and that it is
prior to them (1029a5–7, 30–3). A proper understanding of form has changed our initial views about the relation of
form to matter and to compound.

CHAPTER 11 § 133

247

When we see that the form is the explanatory actuality realizing the proximate potentiality of the matter, we can see
why the form that is the essence of natural organisms must include proximate matter. Aristotle has therefore
strengthened his claim that form is essence.

12 Form and Substance
134. Particulars as Forms and Compounds
So far we have explained why Aristotle thinks form is the essence of a natural substance, and therefore satisﬁes the
essence-criterion for substance. We still have to show that it satisﬁes the subject-criterion. Aristotle reminds us at the
beginning of Metaphysics vii 13 and again in viii 1 that substance is subject, and in viii 1 insists that form is subject, and
also a this and separable in account (1038b5–6, 1042a26–9). These remarks assure us that he still intends substance to
be a subject, a this, and separable. We must still be convinced that the same thing that satisﬁes the essence-criterion will
satisfy the subject-criterion. We have seen why Aristotle has good reason to identify certain universals—the essential
properties of natural organisms—with form rather than matter; but we need to see if he can also argue that the subject
is form.1
In vii 1 Aristotle assumes that a basic subject is a this and a particular (1028a12, 25–7). The remarks about thises in vii
3–4 do not count against this initial assumption; and it is equally reasonable to assume that the primary subjects
identiﬁed with their essences in vii 6 are particulars.2 Aristotle continues to apply ‘this’ to particulars. He calls the
product resulting from production or becoming a this (1033a31–2). He calls Socrates or Callias a this (1033b23–4),
and ‘this soul and this body’ (1037a9), and also calls him a particular (1035b30, 1037a10, 1040b2). He insists that
matter is needed for everything that is not an essence and form ‘all by itself’ (auto kath'hauto) but a this, and continues:
‘Hence matter does not belong to the universal circle, but these 〈material parts〉 are parts of the particular circle’
(1037a1–3). Aristotle argues that since thises have matter, particulars have it; he must assume that the thises are
particulars.3
These remarks suggest that a substance is a particular material subject; and so if form is to be substance, it must be a
particular material subject. Aristotle insists that a particular such as Socrates is a compound of form and ‘ultimate’ (i.e.
particular) matter (1035b30–1, 1036a2–3, 1037a32–3, 1039b20–31). Such remarks suggest that the contrast between
form and compound is a contrast between universal and particular, between the formal property and the subject that
has the property. If that is the only

CHAPTER 12 § 134

249

relevant contrast between form and compound, then forms cannot be particular subjects.
We have already seen, however, that Aristotle draws more than one contrast between form and compound, and that
being a form and being a compound are not always mutually exclusive. Among universals he distinguishes immateriate
forms (circle), materiate forms or formal compounds (statue, horse), and material compounds (bronze circle). A
parallel distinction between particulars identiﬁes particular forms that are also formal compounds.4
Aristotle's use of different contrasts between form and compound makes his position harder to state. In his view, a
particular must include some particular bit of matter, since this is needed for a unique spatio-temporal location. Since it
has this location, it is not a universal, which is in many places at once (1040b25–6). There are two instances of the
universal circle only because there are two individual bits of matter embodying them (cf. 1035b1–3). Universals, both
materiate (such as bronze ball and statue) and immateriate (such as circle), are immaterial, since none of them is a
material object; and particulars, whether they exemplify immateriate or materiate universals, are material. Aristotle
marks this contrast by saying that universals are forms and particulars are compounds.
It follows that a materiate universal form (e.g. statue, man) is both a compound (in contrast to circle) and a form (in
contrast to the particular); and sometimes Aristotle exploits both contrasts at once. He says the universals man, horse,
etc. are not substances, but a compound of this form and this matter ‘as universal’, while Socrates is composed of this
particular matter (1035b27–31).5 In this case both the universal and the particular are compounds. On the other hand,
Aristotle comments that the parts of the account are the parts of the form only, and the account is of the
universal—being circle is the same as circle and being soul is the same as soul. In contrast to the (universal) form, a
(particular) compound, such as this circle and any other particular, has no deﬁnition, since that applies only to
universals (1035b31–1036a8). In this case the compound is the particular and the form is universal; no distinction is
drawn between immateriate universals such as circle and materiate universals such as statue or bronze circle.6
By speaking of form and compound to mark two different contrasts Aristotle makes his claims more obscure, but not
necessarily inconsistent; each contrast is intelligible in its own right, and if we can combine the two, we can understand
his views on particulars. Some particulars will be material but immateriate forms (this particular circle), others material
and materiate forms, i.e. formal compounds (this statue),

250

CHAPTER 12 § 135

others material compounds (this bronze ball). Aristotle is quite justiﬁed in speaking of particular forms that are
compounds of form and particular bits of matter.

135. Particular Forms as Substances
If the distinction between form and compound allows particular forms that are also formal compounds, it remains to
show that Aristotle has good reason to believe in such things, and to believe that they are substances.
The particular substantial forms he recognizes are particular natural organisms such as horses and trees. In contrast to
particular circles, these are not pure forms, but formal compounds. A particular circle needs some particular bit of matter
or other if it is to be a particular, but the circle does not essentially actualize the potentialities of any bit of matter; there
is no matter whose natural organization and structure are explained by its circular shape. Particular materiate forms,
however, are formal compounds. A particular tree essentially includes not just some particular bit of matter or other,
but a bit of matter of the right functional type whose potentiality it actualizes—a bit of proximate matter.
On the other hand, a natural organism is a formal compound, a materiate form, in contrast to such particular material
compounds as bronze balls. A particular bronze ball is a material compound because it essentially includes a bit of
matter of just the sort of composition that makes it bronze. A particular natural organism does not essentially include
matter of such a deﬁnite type, but only the right sort of proximate matter. We can therefore speak of a particular
materiate form either as a form or as a compound, if we are clear about what we mean.
Just as Aristotle is unconcerned about whether man is a (materiate) form or a (formal) compound (1043a37–b1), he is
unconcerned about the particular man:
If the soul also is Socrates, then he is twofold—some 〈speak of him〉 as soul, others as the compound. But if this
soul is unconditionally also this body, then the particular is as the universal is. (1037a7–10)7
A particular formal compound essentially includes a particular bit of proximate matter; and hence the conditions for its
persistence are different from the conditions for the persistence of a particular material compound (e.g. this bronze
ball). The same bit of proximate matter persists as long as it retains its functional properties, those that belong to it as
part of this particular organism; and it may retain these even if its

CHAPTER 12 § 135

251

constituent piece of remote matter perishes. The piece of remote matter perishes if enough bits of it are replaced, even
if they are replaced by other bits of the very same kind of stuff; but the proximate matter may survive. The same
proximate matter of a crown may persist even if eventually all the original bits of its remote matter are replaced, as long
as the crown keeps the same functional properties, and therefore the same proximate matter.8
Aristotle is therefore justiﬁed in believing both that particulars such as Socrates are compounds, and that they are
particular forms. Since Socrates includes a particular bit of proximate matter, he differs from the materiate universal
form, and Aristotle is justiﬁed in speaking of the universal as ‘the account 〈i.e. form〉 without qualiﬁcation’. He
contrasts it with the essence of the particular, an essence which is a compound, comes into being and perishes
(1039b20–31), because it includes a particular bit of matter. The essence of this house is ‘the form in the matter, and
one of the particulars’ (DC 278a9–10). Aristotle refers to the same particular essence as both a compound and a
particular form, since it is both a materiate form and a formal compound.9
If the same subject is essentially a piece of proximate matter, a particular form, and a formal compound, these three
different properties may still explain different sets of further properties. Aristotle recognizes three types of
subject—matter, form, and compound—and claims that matter is a this potentially but not actually, form is a this and
separable in account, and the compound is separable unconditionally and the proper subject of becoming and
destruction (1042a25–31). These three descriptions are probably meant to be true of the same material substance and
subject.
The matter that has the potentiality to be a this is the proximate, not the remote matter (cf. DA 412a6–10).10 The form
that is the this is the particular formal compound. In so far as it is a compound, it includes a piece of proximate matter
that makes it separable from any particular bit of remote matter. In so far as it includes a piece of proximate sensible
matter it comes into being and ceases to be.11 The descriptions ‘matter’, ‘form’, ‘compound’ cannot always be
substituted for each other, since they identify different features of the particular substance; and the form is primary,
since it explains the substantial status of the proximate matter and formal compound.12
A natural but mistaken conception of the difference between form and compound might lead us to suppose that if
particular organisms are compounds, as Aristotle says, then they cannot be forms. On the other hand, a correct grasp
of the distinction shows that the distinction between materiate form and compound applies both to universals and to
particular natural substances, and that particular forms are good

252

CHAPTER 12 § 135

candidates for being particular substances. The particular form is the ﬁrst actuality of its proximate matter; its
persistence does not require the persistence of any bit of remote matter, and therefore it counts as a basic subject,
something identical to its essence. Aristotle fulﬁls his aim of showing that form meets the conditions for being a basic
particular subject.

136. The Nature of Particular Forms
Socrates and Callias share the same speciﬁc form, man, and differ because of their matter (1034a5–8).13 The
differences caused by their different matter must imply that their particular forms are different; for since Socrates'
form is identical to Socrates and Callias' form to Callias, the identity of the two forms would imply, absurdly, the
identity of Socrates and Callias.14 The differentiating features of particular compounds are coincidental to the speciﬁc
form (1058b8–12), since the peculiarities of Socrates or Callias are not essential to his being a man; but they cannot be
coincidental to the particular forms. Socrates' particular form is identical to Socrates, and Callias' particular form to
Callias; hence, if the difference between particular forms is coincidental to them, it must also be coincidental to
Socrates that he is different from Callias. But it cannot be coincidental to a particular that it is distinct from another
particular; and so this cannot be coincidental to the particular form either. The difference between the particular forms
must be essential to them.15
But what sort of difference is it, and what sort of differentiating property is essential to each form?16 It can hardly be a
purely numerical difference, distinguishing different particular forms by their different bits of remote matter.17 For no
particular bit of remote matter is essential to Socrates' particular form. Socrates' existence depends on the existence of
a bit of proximate, not of remote, matter; and persistence of a bit of proximate matter depends on the persistence of its
particular form.18
It is easier to see what sorts of properties are essential to a particular form if we appeal to the explanatory role of form
and essence. The particular substantial form ensures the persistence of the particular whose form it is, because it is the
essence of the particular. Hence a man has a particular substantial form, while a musical man has none, because the
essence of a particular man explains more about this particular than the essence of a musical man explains; that is why
the perishing of the man is a genuine substantial change and the perishing of the musical man is not. If the form is to
explain the character of this bit of proximate

CHAPTER 12 § 137

253

matter, it should include the right sorts of qualitative features to distinguish it from other particular forms and to
explain the special features of this bit of proximate matter.19

137. The Role of Particular Forms
Aristotle's clearest references to particular form, in Metaphysics xii and Generation of Animals iv, suggest this explanatory
role. The causes of substances are particulars, your matter and form and efﬁcient cause or mine.
For the particular is the origin of the particulars; for man is the origin of man universally, but there is no such man
〈who is no particular man〉, but Peleus is the cause of Achilles, and your father of you, and this B of this BA.
(1071a20–2)
. . . and 〈the causes〉 of the things in the same species (eidos) are different, not in species (eidos), but because
different particulars have a different cause—your matter, form (eidos), and moving cause, and mine—but these are
the same in universal account. (1071a27–9)
The forms that are thises must be particular instances of some universal form, and they will need the right special
properties to explain the particular events they are required to explain.20
Aristotle argues that the most proper cause of generation is the particular more than the genus. The particular provides
what is special to Coriscus, and is more important.
What is special and particular always has a greater inﬂuence towards generation; for Coriscus is both a human being
and an animal, but human being is closer to what is special to him than animal is. Now both the particular and the
genus generate, but the particular does so more; for that 〈i.e. a particular〉 is what substance is. For indeed what
comes into being certainly comes to be of some kind (poion ti), but also a this; and that 〈i.e. a this〉 is what
substance is. (GA 767b29–35)21
The species is closer than the genus to the special features of the particular man Coriscus; but in saying that the most
special and the most particular is most important Aristotle refers to features special to Coriscus as opposed to Socrates.
What is special and particular is identiﬁed with a this and a substance. Here as earlier in the GA, Aristotle assumes that
‘the substance of (or ‘among’) things that are is found in the particular’ (731b34); and by ‘particular’ he means a spatiotemporal individual such as Coriscus or Socrates (768a1–2, b13–15). A parent provides the cause of becoming by
providing the form (729a10); and if this is particular, it must be ‘your form and mine’, the particular form mentioned
in Metaphysics xii.

254

CHAPTER 12 § 137

If the form is to explain the peculiar characteristics of the offspring resulting from generation, it must be the particular
form of the parent, since the speciﬁc form does not explain peculiarities.22 The particular form of Callias' parent
explains the characteristics of Callias and of his particular form at birth, and Callias' particular form explains Callias'
behaviour in his lifetime. Since Aristotle intends this explanatory role for particular forms, he must intend them to
include the qualities of Callias that provide a teleological explanation of his behaviour.
In the GC Aristotle attributes the appropriate explanatory role to a particular form. He claims that the form persists as
long as the particular organism is alive, and that it is the proper subject of growth (321b25–8). If the form is to grow it
must include some matter, and so must be a compound; and since it replaces its remote matter in growth, it must be a
formal, not a material, compound. The form, rather than the remote matter or the material compound, is the proper
subject of growth, because the process of growth in organisms is controlled by the functions and relations of the
organs—it is not a mere quantitative increase in the matter (cf. DA 415b28–416a18).23
If a form grows and changes, then it must presumably differ qualitatively from other conspeciﬁc particular forms,
since not all conspeciﬁc organisms grow in the same way. In conceiving the form as a particular subject of growth
Aristotle attributes to it the same sort of explanatory role that he attributes to it in the GA; it must therefore have the
appropriate peculiar qualities.24
In describing the change and persistence of a political community, Aristotle relies on something parallel to the
particular form that persists through the growth of an organism. He denies that simply being in the same place makes
a city the same, as it makes rivers the same (Pol. 1276a34–b1).
For since a city is a type of association, and speciﬁcally an association of citizens in a political system, it is necessary
that if the system becomes other and different in form, it will seem that the city is not the same either, just as we say
that a chorus that is now comic and now tragic is a different chorus 〈on these occasions〉, even though often the
people in it are the same, and likewise we say that any other association or combination is different, if the manner of
combination is different, as for instance we say that the same notes produce different scales, if the scale is in one
case in the Dorian mode, in another case in the Phrygian. (1276b1–9).
In this case also Aristotle has in mind a particular mode of organization of the constituent matter, and takes this to
persist and to change (since, e.g., Athens could clearly modify its democracy without becoming a different city, though
it could not change from democracy to

CHAPTER 12 § 138

255

oligarchy). The particular form plays the same role in the individual substance.
Since the form of a living creature is its soul (1037a5–10), particular forms should be particular souls. If Socrates' soul
is to have the explanatory role that Aristotle intends for particular form, it should differ from Callias' soul in having
those features of Socrates' character and personality that distinguish Socrates from other people. For further details on
particular souls we must turn to the De Anima and the Ethics. But we can infer enough from the Metaphysics to justify us
in expecting Aristotle to develop his view in this way.25 Some of the evidence we have appealed to is, admittedly, outside
Metaphysics vii–ix. But that does not make it irrelevant; for the strategy of these books requires particular forms to
satisfy Aristotle's demands of substance.

138. Particular Forms and the Criteria for Substance
If we are now fairly convinced that Aristotle means to identify substance with particular form, we must see if it really
satisﬁes his initial constraints. He claimed in vii 3 that if we attend to separability and thisness, we ﬁnd that form and
compound are substances to a higher degree than matter is (1029a29–30).26 He should now be able to defend that
claim by appeal to his conception of particular form.
The parts of the proximate matter fail some of the conditions for being basic subjects, and Aristotle denies that they
are substances.
Further, even among the things that seem to be substances, most are evidently 〈only〉 potentialities. These
include the parts of animals (for none of them is separated; whenever they are separated, they exist 〈only〉 as
matter), and also earth, ﬁre, and air. For none of these is one, but each is a sort of heap, until they mature and some
one thing comes to be from them. One would be most inclined to suppose that the parts of ensouled things and the
corresponding parts of the soul turn out to be beings both in actuality and in potentiality; for they have origins of
motion from some 〈source〉 in their joints—that is why some animals keep on living when they are divided. But
nonetheless, all these things are 〈only〉 in potentiality—as long as they are one and continuous by nature, not by
force or by growing together (that sort of thing is a deformity). (1040b5–16)
A part is inseparable because its continued existence is essentially the exercise of its function in the whole; if the whole
is destroyed and only a hand (as we tend to say) is left, that is not really the same hand, but only a homonym. When the
hand has been separated (and therefore has ceased to exist), all that is left is a piece of remote matter. The proximate
matter depends on the form, and so cannot claim to be a more basic subject than the form.

256

CHAPTER 12 § 138

Moreover, bits of remote matter, in Aristotle's view, are just heaps, not proper unities. Matter is potentially a this
(1042a27–8), but not actually a this, if it is a heap, but not a whole, and therefore not a proper unity.27 Unity requires
some natural continuity of the sort that makes the subject more than a mere collection; and this sort of unity is
characteristic of ‘a whole that has some shape and form’ (1052a22–3), and especially of something that ‘has within it
the cause of its being continuous’ (1052a24–5).28
A whole has some further unity beyond the collection of its parts because its identity is distinct from the identity of the
collection. A sign of its unity is the impossibility of dividing it into parts of the same sort; a bit of gold is divisible into
bits of gold because it is just a collection of bits of gold, whereas a tree is not divisible into trees, because it is not a
mere collection. Aristotle might appeal to this feature of wholes to show that they satisfy his demand in the Categories
for numerical unity, which he takes to require indivisibility.29
Since a whole is composed of a particular collection of parts it can be predicated of them; but they need not be prior to
it in nature or account. For some wholes (e.g. living organisms) can survive the loss of some of their constituents; and
since the persistence of a collection requires the persistence and juxtaposition of all of its components (cf.
1043b35–1044a1), the whole can survive the destruction of this particular collection. Wholes are therefore good
examples of thises, and they remain in being because of their forms rather than their matter; hence the form is
separable in account and in nature from its matter.
A heap, by contrast, is nothing more than this collection of constituents, and its persistence consists in the mere
continued juxtaposition of these constituents which do not depend on it in the same way; we cannot, therefore, regard
it as a basic subject or a this or separable.30
In so far as matter comes in heaps and collections, it is not a subject in its own right; the narrow predication-formula
shows that it is not a substance, since its being consists in the collection being predicated of its parts, which are more
basic subjects than the collection itself. Once the predication-formula and the subject-criterion are properly
understood, they show that matter cannot meet the conditions for being the best type of substance; like the material
compound, it turns out to be secondary to form, as Aristotle suggested at the very beginning of his argument
(1029a5–7).31
Forms, therefore, are thises because they are wholes independent of their constituents; there is no more basic subject
whose persistence partly constitutes the persistence of the tree or dog.32 To say this is not to say that the form requires
no matter at all. It always requires some

CHAPTER 12 § 139

257

suitable remote matter, but it does not require any particular bit of remote matter. Though it requires a bit of
proximate matter, this matter is not independent of the particular form, and therefore does not count against the claim
of form to be a basic subject. Since Aristotle thinks the proximate matter and the particular form are one, he could
have said that proximate matter turns out to be substance; but he would not be saying in that case that matter as opposed
to form is substance.
Aristotle, therefore, still believes that substance is subject, and that form is the primary type of subject (1029a2–7). He
has shown that the essence-criterion and the subject-criterion lead to particular forms. In vii 3 he mentioned the
essence, the universal, and the genus together, as though the essence-criterion pointed to universals as substances, and
only the subject-criterion pointed to particulars (1028b33–6). But the summary in vii 13 implies a different relation
between the criteria:
Just as the subject, the essence, and the 〈compound〉 from the two are said to be substance, so is the universal.
We have discussed the ﬁrst two—the essence and the subject—and 〈we have found〉 that something is a subject
in either of two ways, either by being a this, as the animal is the subject for its attributes, or as the matter is the
subject for the actuality. (1038b2–6)
The ﬁrst sentence of this summary suggests that the subject is matter and the essence is the form; but the second
sentence rejects any opposition between subject and essence, and insists that the this is also a subject. Since Aristotle
has shown that the this is a particular form which is also the essence, he identiﬁes the essence with a type of subject.33

139. Particular Forms as Primary Substances
If Aristotle has good reason to identify particular forms with basic subjects and primary substances, he has proved
only part of his initial claim. For he afﬁrms that form, matter, and compound are all subjects, and therefore substances.
His account of form as substance should therefore justify this more generous construal of the range of substance.
Aristotle compares the three successful candidates:
The subject is substance. In one way matter is a subject. (By ‘matter’ I mean what is potentially but not actually a
this.) In another way, the account and the form (morphê) which, being a this, is separable in account 〈is a subject〉.
The third 〈type of subject〉 is the compound of these two; only this comes to be and perishes, and it is
unconditionally separable. Some substances speciﬁed by the account are unconditionally separable and some are
not. (1042a25–31)
Form is the primary candidate, since it is a this in its own right, and a

258

CHAPTER 12 § 139

subject is a this in so far as it is a form (DA 412a6–9). Hence form is the primary substance (1037a28–9).
Aristotle's admission that matter and compound are substances (e.g. 1035a1–2) extends in the ﬁrst instance to
proximate matter and the formal compound. The ‘matter and material substance’ that he describes (1049a36) is the
proximate matter. For he argues that we can say a box is wooden, but not earthen, because the wood, not the earth, is
potentially the box, and therefore its proximate matter.
Sometimes we call something not that, but that-en—e.g. a box is not wood, but wooden; nor is wood earth, but
earthen; and again, earth, if the same applies, is not that other thing, but that-en. In all these cases 〈where F is
G-en〉, G is unconditionally potentially F; e.g. a box is neither earthen nor earth, but wooden, since wood is
potentially a box, and this is the matter of the box—wood in general of box in general, and this wood of this casket.
(1049a18–24)34
In general we can say that ‘F is G-en’ only in cases where G is the proximate matter of F.
The matter that is expressly identiﬁed with substance is the proximate matter. This depends on the form for its identity
no less than things such as musicians depend on men for their identity; hence the proximate matter, like musicality,
fails to identify a deﬁnite subject in itself, and so is ‘indeﬁnite’ (1049a36–b2; cf. 1028a26–7), though (unlike musicality)
it is identical to the form that makes it a deﬁnite subject.
The proximate matter, therefore, counts as a substance for reasons that are inapplicable to the remote matter. The
remote matter and the material compound turn out not be primary substances, because they are not basic subjects.
Remote matter is not a basic subject, because its components are more basic subjects on which it depends. The
material compound is not a this, because the form and the matter are more basic subjects on which it depends. By
contrast, since the form does not depend on the persistence of a particular bit of remote matter, it does not depend on
a more basic subject.
Still, it would be reasonable to concede that remote matter and the material compound are subjects and substances to
some degree. Though he denies that ﬁre and earth are the proximate matter of a human being, Aristotle allows that
they are a human being's matter (1044b1–3). Since a substance is predicated of its matter, the human being should be
predicated of his remote matter, and the remote matter should be to that extent a substance; and since the remote
matter of a human being is the more proximate matter of his body, it should count as the material substance that is the
subject of the proximate matter. It is not as much of a substance, since it is neither a genuine unity in its own right nor
identical to a genuine unity (as proximate matter is identical to form), but it is a substance to some degree.

CHAPTER 12 § 140

259

Similarly, a material compound is not a genuine unity in its own right, since it depends on the persistence of the form
and the remote matter. But it is a subject of change (the bronze ball, e.g., undergoes changes either in its form or in its
matter), and so may be a substance to some degree; every change in a formal compound implies some change in a
material compound, just as every change in proximate matter requires some change in remote matter. Though
Aristotle does not explicitly concede substantial status to remote matter and the material compound, he probably
intends to concede it, and his theory makes the concession reasonable.
Aristotle is not exclusive in his view of what counts as a substance. He argues that form satisﬁes the criteria for
substance, suitably interpreted, better than other candidates. But he concedes that from one point of view the
compound is more separable than the form. He does not require the primary type of substance to satisfy all the criteria
completely, under every natural interpretation; he allows candidates that satisfy some of the criteria to some extent to
count as substances to some degree. By appeal to the conditions for being a this and a basic subject, Aristotle can
decide when to be strict and when to be lax about the initial criteria. He has good reasons both for treating form as the
primary substance and for allowing matter and compound to be substances to some degree.
Though Aristotle does not sum up his discussion in exactly these terms, it exploits a familiar Aristotelian technique. In
iv 2 he claims that beings are focally connected to substance, and in vii 1 he repeats this claim, applying it to the
categories. His view about substance suggests that matter and compound are focally connected to form, so that focal
connexion appears among substances, not only between substances and other beings. Particular form is the primary
type of substance because it is a basic subject; matter and compound are substances to the extent that they are subjects.
Aristotle's views about substance can be explained so that they conform to a central guiding principle of the Metaphysics.

140. Objections to Universals as Substances
If these views about substance constitute a satisfactory theory, however, they must answer the puzzles that were raised
in Book iii. The solution summarized at the beginning of vii 13 (quoted above, § 138) removes one reason for thinking
that universals must be substances, by showing that particular forms satisfy the essence-criterion. But Aristotle has not
yet analysed all the arguments that seemed to show that universals must be the ﬁrst principles, and therefore must be
substances. Unless he can

260

CHAPTER 12 § 140

show that the truth in these arguments is consistent with his view of substance, he has left his view exposed to a
serious objection. In vii 13–16, therefore, he discusses the claims of universals.
He presents a series of arguments to show that ‘it would seem to be impossible for any of the things spoken of
universally to be substance’ (1038b8–9), and that ‘it is evident from these things that none of the things belonging
universally is substance’ (1038b35).35 Especially he discusses the claim of the universal to be something's substance,
arguing that in fact it does not satisfy the essence-criterion. He still assumes that ‘each thing seems to be nothing other
than its own substance, and the essence is said to be the substance of each thing’ (1031a17–18). It follows that the
substance of x will have to be the essence of x and therefore (by the argument of vii 6) identical to x, so that if x and y
have the same substance and essence they are identical.
These claims about substance and essence undermine the claims of the universal.
First, each thing's substance is the substance peculiar to it, which does not belong to another thing; the universal,
however, is common, since what is called universal is what naturally belongs to more than one thing. Then which
thing's substance 〈among the things it belongs to〉 will the universal be? It must be the substance either of all or
of none of them. It cannot be the substance of all; if it is the substance of one of them, then the others will be this
one too, since things that have one substance also have one essence and are themselves one. (1038b9–15)
If the species is the substance of any one of its particulars, every other particular in the species will be identical to that
one, since the species is no more the substance of Socrates than of Callias and Coriscus.36 The species will therefore
have only one member, and there will be no plurality for the universal to belong to. To claim that the universal is
substance is to abolish both a plurality of conspeciﬁc particulars and the universal that is supposed to be common to
the plurality; if there are no many, there is no one belonging to the many.37
This argument requires a universal substance to be the substance and essence of whatever we count as a basic subject,
and therefore to be identical to the basic subject.38 This was the requirement for essence in vii 6; and to fulﬁl it an
essence had to be particular and identical to its subject. Universals cannot fulﬁl the condition in this way.
Aristotle also appeals to the subject-criterion: ‘Further, substance is what is not 〈said〉 of a subject, but a universal is
in every case said of a subject’ (1038b15–16). The subject-criterion was used to pick out substance in vii 3; but it
needed careful interpretation to avoid making matter the only subject. We found that Aristotle interprets the criterion
through the narrow, not the broad, predication-formula, and therefore

CHAPTER 12 § 141

261

counts form as a subject; for the form is not said of a subject in the narrow sense, that its being consists in one thing
being said of another.
Our account of particular form has shown why this is so. A particular form includes a particular bit of proximate
matter; but its being does not consist in its being said of any remote matter, even though it cannot exist without some
bit of remote matter or other. A universal, by contrast, has its being in being said of a subject. Aristotle assumes that its
being a universal is essentially its being a property of a subject; it therefore requires a subject distinct from it, and
cannot be the subject that is properly identiﬁed with substance.39
Aristotle assumes that a substance must be a this; and since he takes a this to be a basic subject, he must deny that
universals are thises once he denies that they are basic subjects (1038b34–1039a2). Only particular substances will be
thises, and the species-form, since it is in many places at once, is a universal, not a particular, not a this, not a subject,
and therefore not a substance. Aristotle concludes:
Nothing that belongs universally is a substance, and nothing predicated in common signiﬁes a this, but a such.
Otherwise there are many 〈unwelcome〉 consequences, including the Third Man. (1038b35–1039a3)
The Third Man results from treating a species, man, as a this, as a particular substance and subject.40
These criticisms support Aristotle's positive arguments for his own view of substance. In vii 10–11 he explains form
and essence in a way that shows why particular forms are essences and substances. In vii 13 he continues the argument
by explaining why species and genera are not substances.41

141. The Case for Universal Substances
None the less, Aristotle seems to say that some conditions for being a substance are met only by universals and not by
particulars. Universals are the objects of scientiﬁc knowledge, which is of general laws; and since these laws apply
without spatial or temporal restriction to all the particulars of a given kind, they must be about universals. In the
Analytics Aristotle afﬁrms the reality of universals (APo 85b15–18), and he has no reason to retreat in the Metaphysics.
We have scientiﬁc knowledge about Socrates only when we grasp the universal man; and our knowledge of the
universal does not depend on our knowing Socrates. Priority in knowledge is one of the types of priority held to be
characteristic of substance; and universals seem to satisfy it. Equally, they seem to be prior in deﬁnition; for Socrates is
essentially a man, and

262

CHAPTER 12 § 141

the deﬁnition of the universal man will be part of Socrates' deﬁnition, but the converse will not be true.
Each universal natural kind has a deﬁnition that is the basis for demonstration of the intrinsic coincidents. The
deﬁnition tells us the essence of the universal; and since the conditions for identity and persistence of a particular
instance are not the same as those for a universal, the deﬁnition of the universal cannot be the deﬁnition of the
particular. Since a particular has matter it is generated and destroyed (1039b27–31), and has a spatio-temporal position
and career. Since these features are essential to it, and incompatible with being a universal, its deﬁnition cannot be the
same as a deﬁnition of the universal. Seeing this, Aristotle sometimes says a particular has no deﬁnition (1036a2–9,
1039b27–1040a7), but explains himself by saying it has no scientiﬁc deﬁnition (1039b32). It is essentially material and
matter makes it indeﬁnable (1036a2–9).
Everlasting particulars that are the only members of their kind, e.g. the sun, are also indeﬁnable, though not because
they are perishable. Even if we ﬁnd the essential properties of the sun, we have not found a deﬁnition if the properties
are capable of being duplicated by another particular; for the sun is a particular, as Cleon and Socrates are.
As we have said, then, we fail to notice, in the case of everlasting things that are 〈particulars〉, especially
those—e.g. the sun or moon—that are unique, that they are indeﬁnable. For sometimes people mistakenly add the
sorts of things (e.g. going around the earth, or being hidden at night) which can be removed without its ceasing to
be the sun. For 〈this sort of deﬁnition implies〉 that if it stops going around or shows at night, it will no longer
be the sun. But that is absurd, since the sun signiﬁes a substance. 〈Sometimes they mistakenly mention only
features〉 that can all be found in something else. If, e.g., something else of this sort comes to be, then clearly this
will also have to be the sun, and in that case, the account will be common 〈to the two〉; but in fact, the sun is a
particular, as Cleon and Socrates are. (1040a27–b2)
In this objection Aristotle shows that he does not believe two particulars with the same deﬁnition are the same
particular. If he did believe this, he would say that something else satisfying the deﬁnition of the sun would be the sun.
He assumes that if the sun were deﬁnable, it would be logically repeatable (i.e. capable of more than one instantiation)
as a universal is.
Such repeatability would be no objection if Aristotle believed that a proper name is simply an abbreviation for a list of
repeatable properties. If he believed this, he would allow the possibility of two Socrateses.42 On the other hand, he does
not allow a deﬁnition to include spatio-temporal properties. If he did, he could no longer be sure that any deﬁnition of
the sun would make the sun logically repeatable. If, then,

CHAPTER 12 § 142

263

he insists that particulars are indeﬁnable, he need not mean that they are ineffable or have no essence. He may mean
only that their essence cannot be stated in purely qualitative, non-spatio-temporal terms.43
Still, his emphatic claim that particulars are indeﬁnable seems to raise a serious doubt about their claim to be
substances. For in vii 4 he claimed that substances are the primary things that have essences, and that something has an
essence only if its account is a deﬁnition (1030a6–7). If a particular cannot have a deﬁnition, apparently it cannot have
an essence or be a substance. Aristotle seems to suggest this when he contrasts the indeﬁnable particular with the
deﬁnable universal form:
〈As a compound〉 with matter he has no account, since matter is indeﬁnable; but he has an account according to
the primary substance, e.g. for man the account of soul; for the substance is the inherent form, from which and the
matter the compound substance is spoken of. (1037a27–30)
This remark applies not only to the particular material compound, but also to the particular form; it cannot have a
universal account, since it essentially includes a particular bit of matter and essentially has spatio-temporal properties.

142. The Status of Particular Substances
Part of the case for universals seems to suggest that being a universal is a necessary condition for being a substance
(since particulars seem to be indeﬁnable and posterior in knowledge and deﬁnition); part of it seems to suggest that it
is a sufﬁcient condition (since universals seem to meet the conditions for priority as well as particulars meet them). To
see how well Aristotle answers the case for universals, we should see how he answers each part separately. First, he has
some replies to the objection that particulars cannot be substances.
Aristotle cannot, for the reasons we have just seen, allow that the particular is in itself an object of deﬁnition and
scientiﬁc knowledge; but he can still fairly insist that scientiﬁc knowledge and deﬁnition apply to a particular form. A
particular man is essentially a particular form that is an instance of the universal species-form, and because of this our
scientiﬁc knowledge applies to the particular; its particular form places it in its proper natural kind. Aristotle says: ‘In
every case we speak of and recognize 〈particulars〉 by the universal account’ (1036a8). He allows that we can apply
our scientiﬁc knowledge of the universal to the particular; and we can apply it because the particular form is an
instance of the speciﬁc form.
On this view, particular forms partly satisfy the requirements for

264

CHAPTER 12 § 142

being objects of knowledge. Not being universals, they are not the primary objects of knowledge; but they are among
the objects that scientiﬁc knowledge applies to. We might say they are what science is about, though not what it is of.
Indeed, they are more important than that. If there were no particular forms, there would be no universal forms either,
and no scientiﬁc knowledge; in this way particular forms are necessary, though no particular one is necessary, for
scientiﬁc knowledge.
But if this defence shows that particulars are knowable, it does not thereby show that they are prior in knowledge.
Indeed, it seems that they are not, if our knowledge is primarily of universals. Knowledge of the universal is necessary
for us to distinguish being a man from being Socrates, and for us to apply to Socrates the laws that hold good of him
in so far as he is a man, not in so far as he is this man. In so far as they are prior and basic in scientiﬁc knowledge,
universals have a claim, not yet undermined, to be substances, and for the same reason particulars seem not to be
substances.
It is equally difﬁcult to see how particular forms can be prior in account or being to universal forms. For since it is
essential to this particular form of this man that it is the form of a man, must it not instantiate the speciﬁc form, and
must the speciﬁc form therefore not exist? In that case, the particular form seems to depend on the universal, and so
cannot be separable from it; but separability is necessary for priority, and so for being a substance.

143. The Difference Between Universals and Properties
Perhaps, however, particular forms do not depend on universals. For Aristotle describes what is common as being
present in many places at once (1040b25–6); and since a universal is common (1038b11), its existence seems to require
not just instantiation, but plural instantiation at a time.44 In that case the particular form that is Socrates could exist
even if he were not an instance of the universal man, because no other men existed. His existence requires the
instantiation of the property of being a man, but not the existence of the universal.45 Being a man consists of only some
of the features that constitute being this man, since it lacks the determinate properties and spatio-temporal position
that makes Socrates the man he is as opposed to some other man; but since it does not require plural instantiation, as
the universal man does, it does not make Socrates depend on the universal.
These distinctions raise further questions about priority. The particular form is essentially particular, not logically
repeatable and not

CHAPTER 12 § 144

265

deﬁnable in qualitative terms, whereas being a man allows plural instantiations; and so the property is not identical to
the particular form. Moreover, the property is independent of this particular form, even though it depends on some
particular form or other. Aristotle, therefore, can maintain that the particular is prior to the universal only if he admits
that the property is prior to any given particular.
Moreover, a property distinct from a universal is hard to ﬁt into Aristotle's scheme.46 He cannot allow that it is
essentially a universal, even though plural instances of it are possible; if it has just one particular instance, it will
apparently itself be a particular. On the other hand, he cannot claim that it is essentially a particular, since it will have
plural instances sometimes (when more than one man exists), and will become a universal. He must apparently claim
that the property is sometimes a particular, sometimes a universal.
If Aristotle recognizes properties that are sometimes particulars and sometimes universals (depending on the number
of instances), he seems to raise a question about his conception of particularity. For his claims about Socrates and the
sun imply that particulars are logically unrepeatable, that they essentially include deﬁnite spatio-temporal characteristics.
If a property with only one instance is a particular, it does not satisfy this demand for unrepeatability; the demand will
be true only for things that are essentially particular. But if Aristotle concedes this much, he needs some further
argument to show that the particular form of Socrates is essentially particular, and not simply a determinate property
that in fact (but not essentially) has only one instance.47
It is difﬁcult, then, for Aristotle to defend the independence of particulars without raising further questions about his
claims. If he wants to distinguish universals from properties, he can show that particulars are independent of
universals, but only if he makes them dependent on properties, and revises his conception of particularity to
accommodate properties. Even though he might win a nominal victory against defenders of universal substances, he
seems to have conceded one point that they urge—the dependence of particular substances on other things that are
not essentially particulars.48

144. Particulars and Universals as Substances
These questions about universals challenge the claim of particular forms to be substances, because they seem to show
that particular forms are not prior in being, knowledge, or deﬁnition, and so do not display the three types of priority
that were taken to be necessary for substance. The challenge clearly succeeds, if Aristotle intends a successful
candidate for

266

CHAPTER 12 § 144

substance to be the only thing that completely satisﬁes the demand for priority.
His defence of form against matter and compound suggests that he does not intend such a strong claim about priority.
He argues that the particular form is the primary substance, not because it alone fully satisﬁes all the criteria for
substance under every natural interpretation, but because it best satisﬁes the criteria as a whole, interpreted by
reference to a reasonable conception of a basic subject. From some points of view, for instance, the material
compound is more separable than the form is, and the form does not completely satisfy the demand for separability.
Still, Aristotle believes that form is the most plausible basic subject and substance, when all the criteria together are
considered.
This defence of form implies that since matter and compound both satisfy some criteria, they also count as substances
to some degree. The different substances are focally connected, and matter and compound will be secondary
substances. It is reasonable of Aristotle to stick to his initial claim that form, matter, and compound are three types of
substance. His argument does not support form to the exclusion of matter and compound, but simply implies that the
legitimate claims of matter and compound depend on the prior claims of form.
If this is Aristotle's conclusion about form, matter, and compound, a similar solution removes some of the difﬁculties
about universals. Such a solution concedes that universals satisfy some criteria for substance, even that they satisfy
some criteria better than particulars do, but argues that particulars are primary substances, and universals (in the
category of substance) are secondary substances.
Sometimes Aristotle seems to agree that his arguments require universals to be substances of some sort.
We have found that the compound and the account are different 〈types of〉 substance; I mean that the ﬁrst is
substance by being the account combined with matter, and the second is the account without addition. Now the
substances spoken of as being compounds all perish, since they also all come into being. But the account does not
perish in such a way that it is ever 〈in the process of〉 perishing; for it has no 〈process of〉 coming into being
either. The essence of this house, not the essence of house, is 〈in process of〉 coming to be; but accounts are and
are not without 〈any process of〉 coming to be and perishing, since we have shown that no one generates or
produces them. (1039b20–7)
Since every particular must be a compound of form and matter, so must a particular form; and that is what Aristotle
calls the essence of this house. The essence of house must be the universal form of house; and since he calls this a
substance, he must recognize universal as well as particular substances.49

CHAPTER 12 § 144

267

Aristotle's explicit remarks, then, give us good reason for taking him to believe that universals are secondary
substances.50 Such a view is also his best defence against nominalism.51 All Aristotle's reasons for believing in the reality
of universals apply just as strongly to the Metaphysics as to any other work. Book vii does not undermine the arguments
given in Book iii for the reality of universals. The view that universals are secondary substances explains why Aristotle
says both that they are substances and that they are not, just as a similar account of matter and compound resolves
other apparent conﬂicts.52
In the Organon Aristotle accepts a doctrine of secondary substances. He retains it in the Metaphysics, just as he still
believes in the primacy of particular substances. But he gives a different defence of the substantial status of substantial
universals. The Categories treats universals as second-best subjects; but the Metaphysics also appeals to the essencecriterion, and to the place of universals in scientiﬁc knowledge; they are no longer merely second-best subjects.
The Metaphysics gives up the term ‘secondary substances’ for universal substances, perhaps because it should not refer
only to universals. Aristotle has analysed particulars more carefully than in the Organon and Physics, and has found that
matter and compound are secondary substances; and a parallel argument justiﬁes the claim of universals. The formal
character of a particular form makes it a this and a basic subject to which matter and compound are secondary; its
particularity makes it a this and a basic subject to which the universal is secondary. Since Aristotle's defence of
particular forms as primary substances allows other things to be secondary substances, he can accommodate universals
without having to take back any of his arguments for particular forms.
Perhaps this argument would be convincing if the only non-particulars to be considered were universals actually
belonging to many particulars. But if Aristotle is committed to belief in properties as well as universals, we might
wonder why properties rather than universals should not be secondary substances. If we concede for the moment that
particulars are primary substances, and that there are non-particular secondary substances, why are these not
properties rather than universals?
Aristotle does not face this question, since he does not see that his conception of particulars and universals requires
belief in properties. He must at least agree that properties are no less substances than universals are; but must he also
agree that properties rather than universals are the objects of scientiﬁc knowledge? If he agrees about this, then belief
that universals are substances results from failure to distinguish universals from properties.
Perhaps he can reply that the plural instantiation necessary for

268

CHAPTER 12 § 145

universals is also necessary for something to be an object of scientiﬁc knowledge. While the qualitative properties we
attribute to universals are just the same as those we attribute to the corresponding properties, plural instantiation is
necessary if universals are to explain features of the spatio-temporal world. We understand particulars in so far as we
group them into kinds under universals, and belief in universals shows us features that the many particulars of a given
kind have in common. The epistemological and explanatory functions of universals seem to suggest that they still have
a claim to be substances even if we also recognize properties. At any rate, this is the direction we should look if we
want to see how many of Aristotle's claims about universals might survive the recognition of properties.

145. The Primacy of Particular Substances
Do Aristotle's concessions to universals leave any reason for believing in the primacy of particulars? He is a realist
about universals; he must concede that particulars depend on properties, even if they do not depend on universals; and
he seems to agree that universals are prior in account and knowledge. If he sees the force of his arguments, should he
not conclude that neither particulars nor universals are prior?53
He does not defend his belief in the priority of particulars over universals as well as he defends his belief in the priority
of form over matter and compound; and his claim about the priority of particulars is less central and important for his
general view of nature and explanation. Still, he might fairly appeal to the sort of priority that is suggested by his
concern with basic subjects. The English ‘subject’ suggests, as Aristotle's Greek does, that the subjects of the sciences
are what the sciences are about or apply to. Though we would have no scientiﬁc knowledge of particulars without
knowledge of universals, the existence of the particulars explains why we have the science, not the other way round.
We do not have reason to believe in particulars because we have to explain something about universals; we believe in
universals because they allow us to understand facts about particulars.
To this extent particulars are prior in knowledge and theory to universals; to justify belief in a given universal we need
to show that it explains facts about particulars, and this is the ultimate test of our belief in universals. The function of
our belief in universals is essentially explanatory; our belief in particulars essentially identiﬁes what is to be explained.
This argument suggests that Aristotle's claims about priority have to

CHAPTER 12 § 145

269

be quite complicated. He suggests that what explains is more knowable than what is explained (Phys. 184a16–26); it will
therefore be prior in one way (APo 71b29–72a5), and Aristotle acknowledges this in counting universals as substances.
But if we ask why universals explain anything, we will have to answer by appeal to the existence of the right sorts of
particulars; and this relation, he wants to say, is not symmetrical. To this extent the search for the cause or explanation
will actually lead us to the thing to be explained, since its existence explains why we have anything to explain in the ﬁrst
place. Aristotle expresses his realism by insisting that facts about the world explain the truth of statements about them,
and are therefore prior to them (Catg. 14b10–22).54 For similar reasons he might plausibly claim that we have reason to
believe in the universals we believe in because they explain the features and behaviour of actually existing particular
forms, and that this ‘because’ indicates the priority of particulars that he wants to defend.
Aristotle needs a similar argument if he is to show why particular substances are also prior to properties. We have seen
that a particular man does not seem to be prior in being to the property of being a man. Perhaps Aristotle ought to
agree that the property—rather than the universal or the particular—is the genuine substance, since it seems to satisfy
the criteria better than either of the other candidates does. If Aristotle has a way out of this conclusion, he must argue
that particulars are prior as explananda to properties in the same way as they are prior to universals. He should claim
that we recognize properties such as being a man because we want to explain facts about particular men; in this way
the particular is the cause of the property, not the other way round.
If this is Aristotle's claim, it is still open to doubt, but it is not an arbitrary preference for particulars, and it attributes to
them a type of priority that is compatible with realism about universals and properties. Aristotle began the Metaphysics
with an inquiry into the four causes. He has seen that to justify the use of a pattern of causal explanation we need to
argue for the existence of something that it applies to. Seeing this, he sees that the basic question is about the existence
of the basic subjects. The question about basic subjects leads him through the argument of iv and vii–ix. Our
explanations involving formal and ﬁnal causes will refer to something in the world if there are really particular forms
and actualities that actualize the potentialities of matter; and so Aristotle tries to show how we must conceive the
subjects that can be identiﬁed with these forms and actualities. In ﬁnding the right subjects he ﬁnds the point and
justiﬁcation of belief in universals as well. For this reason he can still claim that particular forms are the primary
substances.

270

CHAPTER 12 § 146

146. Results of the Metaphysics
In Metaphysics i Aristotle suggested that his predecessors had been too hasty, since they had looked for the causes
without knowing what they should be looking for. Though universal science studies the causes, it should not try to
answer all the Presocratics' questions within one science; it should be a second-order science prescribing the method of
a ﬁrst-order science. Metaphysics iv explains that this second-order science is dialectical, but not purely dialectical; for it
offers to prove conclusions about how things really are, not merely how they seem to be on a coherent account of
common beliefs. These claims for the universal science of being are partly justiﬁed by Aristotle's defence of the
Principle of Non-Contradiction.
The rest of the argument in Books vii–ix may be recapitulated as follows:
1. In iv we ﬁnd that if we speak of some persisting bearer of properties, it must have an essence. Hence we look
for the basic subjects with essences, and for their essences. That is the inquiry begun in Book vii.
2. The basic subjects are identical to their essences, since the subject and its essence come to be and perish
together.
3. The essence of something is its cause, or, more exactly, its explanatory property. When we divide the world into
persisting subjects, we identify the subjects with the properties that best explain the rest of what happens. (We
believe, e.g., that this is the same bench with a new coat of paint, not a new bench created by the new coat of
paint.)
4. The relevant cause is the form. Aristotle reaches this conclusion from his discussion of potentiality and actuality,
and his identiﬁcation of form with actuality.
5. Hence substance is form. Since substances are basic subjects identical to their essences, they turn out to be
particular forms.
The conclusion of the argument supports the original claim in Book i about the necessity of recognizing the four
causes. We identify the basic persistent subjects by reference to the properties that provide efﬁcient-causal explanations
of change and stability. Some of these properties are material, but some are formal and ﬁnal (in natural substances the
same properties have both features); and so we must recognize both material and formal substances if we are to
investigate all the causes that are the proper concern of science.

CHAPTER 12 § 147

271

147. The Role of a Priori and Empirical Argument
The ﬁrst two steps of the previous argument are needed if it is to belong to ﬁrst philosophy, concerning ‘how things
are’ (1030a28). Knowledge of how things are should rest on arguments leading us from the commonsense startingpoints, the things ‘known to us’, to the genuine ﬁrst principles, the things ‘known by nature’. Some things are by their
nature proper objects of knowledge because they are basic in the explanations that best explain the appearances. A
demonstrative science rests on the discovery of these explanatory entities; and such a science tells us how things are.
First philosophy is not itself a demonstrative science, but it is intended to ﬁnd the ﬁrst principles of demonstrative
science. It is therefore justiﬁed in claiming that views about explanation should determine our views about the number
and nature of the persisting subjects there are. The third step of Aristotle's argument, like the ﬁrst two, rests on a priori
considerations about the relation between ontology and explanation.
But these a priori considerations themselves suggest that the fourth step of the argument will not rest purely on a priori
considerations. For once Aristotle appeals to causes and explanatory properties, he makes it clear, on a priori grounds,
that the argument will not be entirely a priori. The empirical considerations enter with the appeal to explanatory
properties.
When we look for basic subjects in a spatio-temporal context we look for basic subjects persisting through change.
Subjects persist in so far as they retain their essential properties; and so the substances will be the basic persisting
subjects of change in so far as they have the basic essential properties. These basic essential properties will be the
potentialities for the relevant changes.
If we are to be justiﬁed in counting some changes as non-essential changes in a subject, and others as the coming to be
or perishing of a subject, we need to make some assumptions about the signiﬁcant laws and regularities in the world.
Aristotle believes that the signiﬁcant laws and regularities include those that explain the behaviour of a natural
organism teleologically. The persisting subject is the natural organism, in so far as it has the formal properties that are
both actualities realizing goal-directed potentialities of the proximate matter, and also persistent potentialities for goaldirected activities.
Aristotle needs to show that laws and regularities appear from the recognition of wholes apart from aggregates. He
could claim this fairly conﬁdently about organisms, to the extent that, whatever we know or do not know about their
origin, they react in fairly constant and

272

CHAPTER 12 § 147

predictable ways to their environment despite the material changes that they undergo. This might still be true even in
the logically possible conditions where we are quite wrong about the origin of organisms. Suppose, for instance, that an
organism's capacity for survival in the environment were quite irrelevant to its reproduction and the survival of its
offspring; suppose a malicious demon had chosen quite arbitrarily to destroy one individual and let another survive
without reference to its ﬁtness for survival in its natural environment. It would follow that the functions, design, and
structure of the organisms familiar to us would be quite irrelevant to how they came into being or reproduce
themselves. This would not prove that organisms are not substances or that they are mere aggregates. For we could
still see them observing laws, and understand their behaviour in the light of these laws, though we would be quite
wrong about how they came to observe them.
Aristotle's actual argument, however, relies on his belief in teleology. This general theory assures him that the formal
and functional properties of natural organisms are genuinely explanatory properties. Teleology assures him not only
that the behaviour of organisms follows laws that refer to properties of the whole organism, but also that the origin
and growth of organisms follow the same laws. It is not just an accident that the mature organism follows laws that
involve wholes; that is the predictable result of other laws affecting the growth and maintenance of the organism.
Features of the matter in turn are understood by reference to the form and function.
Aristotle assumes that if we recognize material constituents as the basic realities, and insist on mentioning only these in
our basic laws, we will ﬁnd it hard to trace regularities and differences in the behaviour of compounds such as natural
organisms. For we will not necessarily be able to ﬁnd the appropriate terms and laws to replace such simple regularities
as ‘When an animal has had nothing to drink for a long time, it tends to try to drink any liquid it sees’. If we deny the
reality of organisms, we will ﬁnd it hard to express anything equivalent to this commonsense law. We might suggest
that ordinary objects are heaps and aggregates, and that commonsense laws are about these, giving rough
approximations to the truth. But then which aggregates are the subjects of these laws? Unless we allow ourselves the
resources of common sense, we may not be able to say.
These faults in a purely compositional approach to substances are especially obvious in the particular Atomist
approach familiar to Aristotle. The Atomists come nowhere near to plausible laws that would explain the behaviour of
persisting subjects. Though they are committed to the reduction of commonsense substances to coincidental heaps,
they have no prospect of making the reduction seem plausible.

CHAPTER 12 § 147

273

On this point our position must be different from Aristotle's, since we now have a less remote possibility of explaining
events in the world without reference to commonsense functionally described substances. But to say we can explain
them is to say we can ﬁnd some sort of explanation, not that we can ﬁnd the appropriate explanation. If we can ﬁnd
laws about wholes and organisms that resist reduction to laws about more elementary substances, we can accept
Aristotle's argument. We can still agree that the main principles of Aristotelian natural philosophy pass the test that
Aristotelian ﬁrst philosophy prescribes for them, since they recognize the right sorts of basic subjects to capture the
appropriate laws and regularities. Aristotle can fairly claim that a theory refusing to admit goal-directed organisms as
basic subjects will fail to ﬁnd all the appropriate laws.
Aristotle's defence of the reality of form implies that neither formal nor material causation is really prior to the other.55
The order of natural priority that he recognizes makes the more basic explanations prior to the less basic; but in this
case neither form nor matter is prior, since neither explanation is more basic.56 In so far as Aristotle has distinguished
two reasonable types of explanations, and shown that neither is appropriately reduced to the other, he has defended the
irreducibility of form.
To believe in particular forms is simply to be guided by the explanatory role of form and function in our judgments
about persistent subjects. The persistent subject that is properly identiﬁed with Socrates is not the material compound;
if he were one of these, then comparatively trivial and (from the explanatory point of view) insigniﬁcant changes would
cause him to perish. He must therefore be identiﬁed with the particular materiate form. The particular form is a basic
subject identical to its essence; this is what we have been looking for in our inquiry into substance; and so Aristotle has
good reasons for identifying particular form with substance.
The argument for identifying substance with form rests partly on a priori, partly on empirical, argument. The role of
empirical argument implies no retreat from the principles of ﬁrst philosophy. First philosophy shows us the connexion
between substance, essence, and explanation. Once explanation is introduced, a more speciﬁc answer to the questions
about substances must be expected to rely on some empirical claim. The conclusion will be more secure the more
plausible the empirical claim is; and Aristotle is wise enough to rely mostly on fairly general and plausible claims.

274

CHAPTER 12 § 148

148. First Philosophy and Strong Dialectic
Aristotle sketches an account of substance that meets the conditions imposed by the methods of ﬁrst philosophy. The
common belief that such things as Socrates, this horse, and so on are substances turns out to be justiﬁed in a way, once
we consider what is required for being a basic subject. But the common beliefs that are justiﬁed also need to be
modiﬁed. For the basic subject and primary substance turns out to be something that common sense does not initially
recognize—the particular form.
Aristotle examines and criticizes common sense by examining the basic subject and the primary essence. His critical
attitude actually allows him to accept more of common sense than he could accept if he were less critical. If we simply
follow common sense, we may rely on the broad predication-formula to interpret the subject-criterion; and then
matter, at most, turns out to be substance. Similarly, if we assume that essences must be universals and that natural
organisms must be compounds of form and matter, we may recognize universal forms and particular material
compounds, but since we will not recognize particular forms identical to their essences, natural organisms will appear
to be coincidental compounds. Moreover, we may think the claims of particulars and universals to be substances are
mutually exclusive, and that no single answer to our initial question about substance is defensible.
Aristotle shows how common sense may lead us astray at these stages of the argument, since some of its natural and
intuitive assumptions lead to unacceptable and inconsistent conclusions. Left to its own devices common sense, and
purely dialectical argument, must conclude that its demands are inconsistent and its initial intuitions unjustiﬁable. It
needs the help of ﬁrst philosophy to show that most of its demands and intuitions are defensible.
We cannot see exactly how ﬁrst philosophy works, or how it differs from pure dialectic, without going into some
details of the interpretation of Aristotle's views on substance. In my view, he does not depart so far from common
sense and the Categories as he would if he believed that universals are the primary substances. Nor do I think his
treatment is purely or primarily aporetic, and to that extent purely dialectical, pointing out that different plausible
candidates for substance conﬂict with some plausible criteria. If Aristotle simply tried to split the difference between
common beliefs, he would be keeping very close to pure dialectic. If, on the other hand, he assumed that only an
immaterial substance could be a proper substance, he would be departing quite far from common beliefs. I have tried
to show that he defends the central

CHAPTER 12 § 148

275

common beliefs, and that his judgment about which ones are central relies on the demand of ﬁrst philosophy for basic
subjects.
First philosophy shows what must be added to common sense. We are right to think Socrates is a substance. But we
have not yet identiﬁed exactly what it is about Socrates that makes him a substance. We must say that he is a particular
form; for this, not the remote matter or the material compound, justiﬁes our normal views about the persistence of
Socrates. We are right to think Socrates is a more important continuant than musical Socrates, and that his becoming
and perishing are genuine substantial changes; and we cannot justify these views if we identify Socrates with a material
compound. We ﬁnd a basic subject with Socrates' temporal career and essence only if we recognize a particular form,
which is also a formal compound.
Metaphysics of the sort described in Metaphysics iv defends common beliefs, but not the very same beliefs that we
began with. Aristotle acknowledges this in arguing that most of the generally recognized substances turn out not to
meet the conditions for substance that are met by particular form (1040b5–16). We may think that Socrates' hands and
feet exist when he no longer exists, and we may think a log is a substance in the same way Socrates is; both of these
beliefs turn out to be false, in Aristotle's view, once we see why Socrates is a substance.
Hence the eventually successful candidate for substance is not one that common sense recognizes at once; it did not
appear at all in the Categories, where Aristotle's term for form, ‘eidos’, was the name of a universal, not of a particular. In
the Physics form is introduced by contrast with matter, but nothing suggests that it is meant to be a particular form. The
particular form appears in the Generation and Corruption, but with no argument to show that it is a substance. In the
Metaphysics Aristotle argues that the truth in commonsense views about substance requires the recognition of particular
forms, and the rejection of some common beliefs about subjects and about parts of substances.
At the crucial points the theory is not supposed to rely, as ordinary dialectical argument relies, simply on the support of
common beliefs. We do not simply endorse common candidates for substance. We argue that substances must be the
basic continuing subjects; that these must be identiﬁed with their essences; and that essences are found by reference to
causes. These claims express the importance of continuing subjects and essences. They allow us to apply tests for
substance apart from the common beliefs, and the tests do not guarantee in advance that the common beliefs will
come out true.
I have often remarked that these claims about substance are not entirely foreign to Aristotle's earlier works; indeed,
Aristotle often defends or assumes such views about subjects, essences, and causes. In

276

CHAPTER 12 § 148

his early works, however, he fails to explain how views on these questions properly determine our views on substance.
He fails to explain this because he regards the doctrine of substance as a product of pure dialectic. I have tried to show
how, from the point of view of strong dialectic, these different issues are connected, and why an understanding of the
connexion leads to a different doctrine of substance.
Dialectic is useful to Aristotle because it deals with questions that do not seem to be open to the ordinary sort of
empirical inquiry. We look to dialectic for answers that we presuppose in empirical inquiry.57 First philosophy performs
the same functions. It is especially clear in Book iv that it inquires into the presuppositions of empirical science; for an
empirical science assumes that it deals with an objective world, and with substances and their essential and coincidental
properties. First philosophy shows why we should accept these presuppositions, and what happens if we attempt to
give them up.
The same is true to some degree of Books vii–ix. They argue for a particular conception of reality that we use to guide
empirical inquiry, so that it cannot itself be an ordinary object of empirical inquiry. Aristotle argues for the reality of
form by showing the difﬁculties of a purely compositional account of basic realities. In arguing for a teleological
conception of form, he makes some apparently more empirical claims. But even these may be presuppositions rather
than simply results of empirical inquiry; for it may turn out that we have to apply teleological and formal conceptions
to ourselves as inquirers. That raises a further issue to be considered in the De Anima.58 While it would be quite wrong
to claim that arguments in ﬁrst philosophy are wholly non-empirical, it is still true that, like dialectic in general, they are
prior to empirical inquiry, in so far as they defend the assumptions taken for granted in empirical inquiry.
If Aristotle's arguments succeed, their consequences for some of his other inquiries are important. If we ﬁnd that he
relies on common beliefs about substances and their essences, we will not at once conclude that his argument is merely
dialectical in the sense that restricts its claim to yield knowledge of objective principles. For his general conception of
substance itself relies on a ﬁrmer basis than mere dialectic. He can therefore justify an appeal to substance by referring
to the defence he has offered in the Metaphysics. To see if Aristotle defends himself this way, or presents theories
needing this sort of defence, we should turn to two further Aristotelian inquiries. Psychology clearly depends on the
theory of substance in ways we will examine. The dependence of ethics is less clear, but we will see that it is no less
important.

III Applications of the Solution

This page intentionally left blank

13 The Soul as Substance
149. Aristotle's Task
In the Metaphysics Aristotle argues for a theory of substance, form, and matter. The theory is a product of ﬁrst
philosophy, and the method of ﬁrst philosophy is strong dialectic. He argues for the existence of ﬁrst substances that
are particular forms; these are natural organisms identiﬁed by the potentialities that are their functional and teleological
properties, and not by the remote matter that is the basis for these properties. In Aristotle's view, the common belief in
the reality of substances irreducible to their matter is correct; ﬁrst philosophy justiﬁes this belief by showing that it
rests on more than common sense, because it rests on the defensible view that formal and functional properties are
ineliminably and irreducibly explanatory.
Aristotle identiﬁes soul with form, and body with matter. He assumes that to have a soul is to have the functional
properties that are the form, and that the relation of soul to body is the relation of form to matter, and of actuality to
potentiality. If Aristotle is right to assume that ﬁrst philosophy answers the main questions in philosophy of mind, we
must admit the power and plausibility of his metaphysical theory.
We must, therefore, ask whether Aristotle fairly examines the speciﬁc problems and questions about soul and body,
and shows that the theory of the Metaphysics offers reasonable answers to them.1 Though soul and body do not coincide
exactly with mind and body, Aristotle's theory may contribute something to philosophy of mind. It will pass an
important test if it helps to answer reasonable questions that Aristotle himself has not asked.
The De Anima not only discusses general questions about the relation of soul and body, but also describes the different
states of the soul—perception, imagination, thought, and desire. This aspect of the De Anima will concern us in
Chapter 14. If we examine it, we should be able to see whether Aristotle uses his general theory, and whether the
theory is responsible for the better or the worse aspects of his account.
Aristotle believes that his view of soul and body allows us to understand the nature and essence of different types of
living organisms, and that when we understand this, we can discover their good. His account of psychic states is
therefore the basis of his ethical argument.

280

CHAPTER 13 § 150

He needs to show that some basic ethical principles themselves rest on principles of ﬁrst philosophy, and hence can be
defended by more than purely dialectical argument. In Chapter 15 we will begin to see how far Aristotle can justify any
such claims about ethics.

150. Puzzles About the Soul
Strong dialectic of the sort practised in ﬁrst philosophy must justify the common beliefs, or most of them, by appeal to
some independently reasonable principles. In De Anima i Aristotle presents the common beliefs, and the puzzles they
raise. As usual, it is worth examining the puzzles, to see that the questions have not been stated correctly. We agree at
the outset that the soul is ‘some sort of principle (archê) of animals’ (402a6–7); but this extent of agreement does not
take us far.2
Do all souls belong to the same species or not? If not, do they differ 〈only〉 in species, or 〈also〉 in genus? As
things are, those who discuss and investigate the soul would seem to 〈ignore this question since they〉 examine
only the human soul. Nor should we forget to ask whether there is just one account of soul, as there is of animal, or
a different account for each type of soul—e.g. of horse, dog, human being, god. 〈On this second view〉, the
universal animal is either nothing or else it is posterior to these; and the same will apply to any other common thing
predicated. (402b1–9)3
Even if the soul is some sort of principle, it may not be worth investigating in its own right; for things with souls may
not (as such) have any genuine or important common property.
To ﬁnd out whether having a soul is an important common property we turn to its commonly accepted attributes. ‘All
deﬁne the soul by three things, one might say—by movement, by perception, and by being incorporeal’ (405b11–12).4
Such different beliefs about the essential features of soul might well suggest that different theorists are really talking
about different things. We cannot simply combine different answers and say that the soul is the cause of both
perception and movement; for if the cause of perception and the cause of movement have nothing more in common,
our use of the term ‘soul’ for them will not show that having a soul is an important common property.5 It will be
especially hard to see any common property if we follow the conception of cause that previous theorists have assumed.
For they seek material causes, and different material causes seem appropriate for understanding movement and
perception.6
Aristotle even suggests, contrary to common beliefs, that the soul is the principle of life, not simply of animal life, and
hence that plants as

CHAPTER 13 § 150

281

well as animals have souls.7 If we agree that everything that is alive has a soul, we cannot even assume that the soul is
essentially the cause of movement or perception. If its functions must include the nutritive and reproductive functions
of plants, it seems even clearer that having a soul is not a genuine common property, but a mere disjunction of
properties.
So far we might assume general agreement that the soul is some sort of material stuff. But Aristotle denies even this
degree of agreement; for he claims that common beliefs also associate the soul with the incorporeal.8 We think that in
some way an organism is one because it has one soul (410b10–15); and no material stuff seems to explain this role. For
if we identify the soul with the stuff that causes movement or perception, we want to know what makes that stuff and
the rest of the material components into one organism; and the stuff that causes movement and perception does not
answer this question (411b5–14). If the soul were simply a material stuff distributed through parts of the body, then we
would expect to be able to split the body into different parts, and to ﬁnd a part of the soul in each; but we do not think
this is possible (411b14–30)9 We believe the soul is indivisibly present in the whole organism; and this belief is hard to
explain if we identify the soul with some type of material constituent.
We connect the soul not only with the unity of organisms at a time, but also with their identity and persistence through
time. We think Socrates exists as long as his soul exists, that without the soul he perishes (411b7–9), and that if one
soul replaces another one person has perished and been replaced by another. But we ﬁnd it hard to see how this
feature of the soul could be explained by some particular material stuff of the sort that might seem to explain
perception and movement.10
If a corporeal soul seems not to explain some features of the soul, we might conceive an incorporeal soul in different
ways. First, we might argue that if it cannot be a material substance, it must be an immaterial substance, neither
identical to nor constituted by a material body. This is the Platonic solution. Aristotle argues that it underestimates the
close connexions between the soul and the body whose potentialities it actualizes (407b13–26)11
Alternatively, if some functions of the soul seem not to be functions of a material stuff, but we think the soul can be a
substance only if it is a sort of material stuff, we infer that the soul is not a substance at all, but some arrangement or
‘attunement’ (harmonia) of material constituents. This theory shows that we can recognize the non-material character of
the soul without treating it as an immaterial substance. None the less, Aristotle rejects any such theory,
(407b27–408a28), maintaining that the soul is a substance.12
The survey of common beliefs about soul shows that a general

282

CHAPTER 13 § 151

account of the soul cannot be read off them, and that we cannot even expect to solve the puzzles they raise by a direct
attack. For it is not clear that the apparent disagreements (about whether the soul is material or not, and about what
kind of material it is) are really disagreements about the answer to one question. If questions about the soul are really
just questions about the cause of perception and motion, and about the source of unity in the subject, then different
answers need not be contradictory. In this case, as in Metaphysics iii, Aristotle's predecessors have overlooked some
important preliminary questions; for we can hardly settle their apparent or real disagreements without deciding what
we should expect an account of the soul to be like.

151. The Solution
In the Metaphysics Aristotle solves the puzzles by isolating the preliminary questions, and answering them through his
own doctrine of substance, form, and matter. The puzzles raised in De Anima i seem to him to demand a similar
approach.
The Presocratics assume that if the soul is to be the cause of movement or perception, we must ﬁnd the sort of
material that is suitable for these processes; some common material feature of the material processes must be present
in all and only perceptions or movements. If we look for this, we may believe that the soul-stuff must itself be highly
mobile if it is to cause movement, or that it must be similar to the stuff in the external world that it perceives. If these
causes of the two different processes must be material causes, they may not involve the same sort of matter; and
therefore the soul may not be an object of study in its own right.
The assumption that causation must be material causation affects even those who accept non-materialist conceptions
of the soul. Those who think the soul cannot be a material cause infer that it cannot be a cause at all, and so accept an
attunement theory. Correspondingly, those who reject the attunement theory because they think the soul is a cause and
a substance, but not a material stuff, infer that it is an immaterial substance; for they assume that if it were material, it
could play only the causal role of a material stuff. They conceive an immaterial substance on the pattern of a material
stuff, and explain its special characteristics by reference to the special stuff composing it.
Aristotle's metaphysical views imply that these are not the only reasonable ways to conceive the soul. For he has argued
that formal as well as material causes are genuinely explanatory, that form as well as matter is a genuine substance, and
that form provides the principle of

CHAPTER 13 § 151

283

unity; and he believes that none of these arguments need involve immaterial substances. These doctrines may therefore
solve the puzzles that arise if we recognize only material causes.
Aristotle seeks to solve the puzzles by arguing that the soul is substance, but substance as form rather than matter, and
therefore a formal rather than a material cause. Once we conceive the soul in this way, we can see why having a soul is
an important common property of living organisms. He assumes the threefold division of substance as matter, form,
and compound, as in Metaphysics viii (1042a26–31); the form is a this, and identiﬁed with actuality as opposed to matter
as potentiality (DA 412a6–11).13 Living bodies are recognized examples of substances, and can be regarded as form,
matter, and compound (412a11–16); Aristotle wants to show that the soul is the natural substance in so far as it is
form.
It follows that every natural body that has life is a substance as compound. But since it is also this sort of body—i.e.
the sort that has life—soul cannot be body, since the body 〈is substance〉 as subject and matter, not said of a
subject. The soul, then, must be substance as the form of a natural body that has life potentially; and since
substance is actuality, the soul will be the actuality of this sort of body. (412a15–21)14
His argument, however, is not completely clear, and some premisses need to be supplied.
He begins from the assumption that ‘the soul is that by which primarily we live and perceive and think, so that it would
be some account and form, not matter and the subject’ (414a12–14). This assumption is not obviously correct. For the
common beliefs described in Book i treat the soul as a principle of animals, not of all living organisms; and though
Aristotle has assumed in some places that plants have souls, he has not justiﬁed the assumption. Indeed, it might seem
to make the problems worse; for if it is hard to ﬁnd a single account of soul to apply to all animals, it might seem still
harder to ﬁnd one that will apply to plants as well.
Aristotle, however, argues that if we ascribe soul to all living creatures, we can explain what souls have in common. For
he understands ‘life’ in teleological terms: ‘By life we mean nourishment, growth, and diminution through oneself ’
(412a14–15). Teleology is implied in the claim that a creature is nourished, grows, and diminishes through itself—from
a causal origin within itself rather than from the action of external agencies; for Aristotle rejects any attempt to describe
or explain nourishment without appeal to ﬁnal causation (415b28–416a18).15
This account of life is Aristotle's answer to the suspicion that being

284

CHAPTER 13 § 152

alive is really several homonymous properties. He thinks being alive is an important common property because it is a
teleological order of the parts and bodily processes of the organism to achieve some constant goals—the survival and
ﬂourishing of the organism or of its species. The claim that something is alive implies that it is ordered to achieve these
goals, and therefore implies some fairly deﬁnite expectations about the subject's structure and behaviour.
In saying that the soul is that by which we live ‘primarily’, Aristotle denies that the soul is the material stuff or
component that something has if and only if it is alive. Even if we found any such stuff, it would not be that by which
we live primarily. What we live by primarily is whatever explains our vital activities; and since Aristotle has shown that
these are goal-directed activities, their primary explanation must refer to the teleologically organized, goal-directed
features of the subject, to the form rather than the matter.
For substance, as we said, is spoken of in three ways, as form, matter, and the compound of both; and of these,
matter is capacity, form actuality. Since, therefore, the compound of body and soul is ensouled, body is not the
actuality of soul, but the soul is the actuality of some sort of body. (414a14–19)
If the soul is what we live by primarily, it must be the ﬁnal cause of living, hence a formal, not a material, aspect of the
subject, and hence the actuality of the body.
The problems about the soul surveyed in De Anima i now turn out to have concerned the explanation and
understanding of the vital activities of living organisms. The problems seemed hard to solve because we did not realize
that vital activities have to be understood with reference to formal and ﬁnal causes. We have the clue to this solution
when we notice that questions about the soul are questions about vital activities, and that both materialist and
immaterialist answers seem unsatisfactory. To complete the solution we only need to agree that the soul is the formal
and ﬁnal cause.

152. The Relation of Soul to Body
Aristotle ought to explain why his account of body and soul as matter and form solves the puzzles that arose about the
relation of soul to body. We should be able to see why the soul is not a body or a constituent of a body, why it is a
substance in its own right, not a mere attunement or other non-substantial aspect of a body, and why none the less it
need not be an immaterial substance independent of a material body.
Aristotle claims that a natural body sharing in life is a compound

CHAPTER 13 § 152

285

substance (412a15–16). The body that is subject and matter is potentially alive (412a19–21). The body that survives the
loss of the soul, and so is no longer alive, is not potentially alive either (412b25–6); nor, however, is the seed from
which the living body grows potentially alive in the relevant sense (412b26–7).16 Hence the only body that is potentially
alive seems to be the one that is actually alive; but that body seems to be the compound rather than the matter. The
relation between these different claims about bodies is obscure.
If we have understood the Metaphysics correctly, these puzzles ought to disappear. Since the proximate matter, the
materiate form, and the formal compound are identical, these are three different ways of describing the same subject.
And so if we must give some account common to every sort of soul, we will say that the soul is the ﬁrst actuality of
a natural organic body. Hence we need not ask whether the soul and body are one, any more than we need to ask
this about the wax and the shape or, in general, about the matter and the thing of which it is the matter. For while
one and being are spoken of in several ways, the actuality 〈and what it actualizes〉 are fully one. (412b4–9)
Soul and body are one in the way that form and matter are one (cf. Met. 1045b17–23).17
Aristotle identiﬁes the form with the ﬁrst actuality of the body, and therefore a sort of potentiality (412a22–7; cf.
417a21–b2). The living creature performs its particular goal-directed activities when it does, and in the sequence it
does, because it has the functional organization and functional states it has; and these are the states that Aristotle
identiﬁes with the soul and ﬁrst actuality, which is the proximate potentiality for the vital activities.18 The next sort of
proximate potentiality will be the one that explains, and is explained by, the functional organization and states; and this
is the sort of potentiality that Aristotle ascribes to the body as matter. To have the proximate potentiality for the right
functional states is to be potentially alive; hence the material body is potentially alive, as the proximate matter of the
functional states. The sort of body that is potentially alive is a body with organs (412a28–b1), since these are the
potentialities explained by the ﬁnal and formal cause.19
It follows that only the body of an actual living organism is potentially alive; for if the organism does not exist, the right
potentialities do not exist either. For similar reasons this organic body does not outlive the soul; for a dead body lacks
the potentialities of the organic body, and so can no longer be the matter of a living organism. Aristotle clearly and
often insists on this point for organs, which are deﬁned by their potentialities (412b20–2); and the same point applies
to the whole body (412b22–5).

286

CHAPTER 13 § 153

To show that this is not the only type of matter that is relevant, Aristotle adds the comment that initially surprised us:
‘It is not the body that has lost a soul that is potentially such as to be alive, but the body that has a soul’ (412b25–6).
The comment implies that there is a body that has lost its soul without ceasing to exist; it therefore refers to the
difference between proximate and remote matter. The body that is the proximate matter of a living organism is not just
a collection of chemical stuffs, not even a collection of compounds of them; and this body does not outlive the soul.
The remote matter—the chemical stuffs and the lumps composed of them—survives the body. When Callias perishes
into ﬂesh and bone (Met. 1035a31–b1), these must be his remote matter; correspondingly, the whole remote body
survives the perishing of the soul and the proximate body.
So far the doctrine of the Metaphysics explains the claims about soul and the different types of body. It should also
explain, however, why the soul is not the proximate body (412a17), even if body and soul are identical.20 Aristotle
should mean that the soul and the body are different ‘in being’, so that what it is to be a body is not the same as what it
is to be a soul.21 Soul and body are one because they have the same histories and the same modal properties; when a
particular organism exists, that is both a particular soul and a particular body, and whatever happens, actually or
possibly, to one happens to the other as well. On the other hand, Aristotle can fairly claim that something is a
proximate body because it has the right potentialities for functional states, and that the same thing is a soul because it
has the functional states that are the right potentialities for vital activities; it will follow that being a proximate body is
not the same property as being a soul, but that every subject that is a soul is also a proximate body.22
The distinctions drawn in the Metaphysics explain Aristotle's claims about body and soul and show how they are
consistent. Moreover, if he is right in claiming that the soul is the primary source of life, and in accepting a teleological
conception of life, his metaphysical theory supports the account of soul as substance and form.

153. Answers to Puzzles
It is still not clear, however, that we should accept Aristotle's claim that the soul is the primary source of life. At the
beginning of the De Anima he claims only that the soul is a ﬁrst principle of animal life, and he still needs to give us
some reason for recognizing more souls than we were initially inclined to. His view is controversial, in so far as we (and
Aristotle's original audience) tend to assume that creatures with souls

CHAPTER 13 § 153

287

must have states of consciousness; we must give up this view if we agree with Aristotle on soul and life.
Following his usual practice, Aristotle begins his discussion of the soul with a description of the common beliefs; and if
he argues dialectically, he should give an account of the common beliefs, show why they are mostly correct and
intelligible when incorrect, and resolve the puzzles that they have raised. We can judge whether his argument is
dialectical, and how good a dialectical argument it is, by seeing how it copes with the common beliefs. We have already
surveyed the puzzles that arise from the different views of soul that focus on its role as the cause of perception or
movement, the source of unity, and as something incorporeal. Each of these views is far more restricted than
Aristotle's claim that everything alive, as such, has a soul; and if he is right, he should show how the more restricted
views of soul, properly understood and modiﬁed, are consistent with each other, and how they reﬂect different parts of
the truth about souls.
First, we understand why the soul is connected with perception and with the initiation of movement, and why some
one thing is connected with both. Both are appropriately mentioned in a teleological account of an animal and are parts
of the animal's form. If we agree about this, we explain why the cause of movement and the cause of perception have
some important feature in common, and why having a soul is not a mere disjunctive property (having a cause of
perception or having a cause of movement). But this solution implies that the causes of movement and perception
belong to the soul in so far as they belong to the animal's form; and then plants turn out to have psychic states too. For
the common feature of the cause of movement and the cause of perception is shared by the goal-directed states of
plants without states of consciousness.
If the soul is the form, we can resolve some of the puzzles about its relation to the body, and show that we need not
sacriﬁce the beliefs that seemed initially plausible but not clearly consistent. For we are proved right to some extent in
believing that the soul is a substance, and that it is ‘incorporeal’. It is a substance irreducible to a material (remote)
body, though not an immaterial substance, and not independent of a proximate material body, but identical to it.23
Since the soul is a substance, it is not a mere attunement of the bodily parts, but counts as an efﬁcient cause of
movement. To regard it as an attunement is to overlook the reasons for regarding it as a substance. For if the soul is
simply an attunement, the body and its parts are the basic substances, and the soul is simply a quality of them, not a
further substance. Aristotle, however, insists that a form is not simply a coincident of matter (though it is that among
other things). The soul

288

CHAPTER 13 § 154

does not depend on any particular remote body, though it always requires some remote body. It does depend on its
own particular proximate body; but this body also depends on the soul, since it does not outlive the loss of the
potentialities derived from soul.24
Since the soul is form, it is the source of unity that makes a heap of material constituents into a single organism. We
believe that one living organism has one soul, not a collection of many souls (e.g. one for movement, one for
perception, and so on), and that it is one organism in so far as it has a single soul; somehow the unity of the soul
explains the unity of the organism (411a24–b30). If soul is form, then Aristotle's theory of form and matter explains a
belief about the soul that we might otherwise ﬁnd puzzling. For a collection of ﬂesh and bones constitutes a single
living organism in so far as it is teleologically organized; the activities of the single organism are the ﬁnal cause of the
movements of the different parts. Since the organism has a single ﬁnal cause, it has a single soul and a single body,
which are the soul and body of a single organism.
Similarly, since the soul is the form, its identity and persistence determine the identity and persistence of the creature
that has it, explaining why Socrates is properly identiﬁed with his soul. If something has a soul in so far as it has life,
then it is reasonable to say that Socrates ceases to exist whenever his soul ceases to exist. His soul will not simply be his
elementary biological vital processes. Since animals have perceptive souls and human beings have rational souls,
Socrates' soul will continue to exist as long as Socrates' vital rational activities persist.25 In the Metaphysics we found
reasons for believing that Aristotle identiﬁes particular substances with particular forms, and therefore identiﬁes
Socrates with his soul. If he assumes this doctrine, he can explain the common belief that a particular person's identity
is especially connected with his soul. Aristotle agrees with Plato's assumption in the Phaedo that Socrates will survive
just as long as his soul survives.26

154. The Contribution of First Philosophy
To this extent, then, Aristotle's account of the soul is part of a dialectical argument solving dialectical puzzles. For he
begins from puzzles in common beliefs, and tries to solve the puzzles by relying on the right principles—those whose
truth implies the truth of most of the apparently conﬂicting common beliefs, and removes the appearance of conﬂict
among them (cf. EN 1145b2–7). If Aristotle's account of soul is plausible, it should answer recognizable questions
about souls. His assumption that the soul is the primary source of life is not intuitive; but it is justiﬁed by its role in the
argument for the account of soul as form, and by the role of that account in solving puzzles about the soul.

CHAPTER 13 § 154

289

If this were all we could say about Aristotle's theory, it would be merely dialectical. In fact, however, he tries to justify
his solution in stronger terms, by appeal to ﬁrst philosophy, and therefore to strong dialectic. He identiﬁes the soul
with form, not simply because this account solves the puzzles in the common beliefs, but because it gives us reason to
believe that there really are such things as souls and that they really explain the states and behaviour of living
organisms. We assume at the start that the soul is ‘a principle of animals’ (402a6–7), something that genuinely explains
their behaviour; but to justify this assumption, we need to make claims about nature that cannot be justiﬁed simply by
appeal to common beliefs. For we could imagine a purely dialectical account of soul that offered a plausible
reconstruction of the common beliefs, but gave us no further reason to believe in the existence of the souls in
question.
Aristotle's account goes beyond such a purely dialectical solution, in so far as it appeals to the further arguments
presented in the Metaphysics, for believing in the reality and signiﬁcance of form. To this extent the De Anima is more
than purely dialectical. It gives us some reason, apart from consistency with common beliefs, for claiming that soul is
form. That claim in turn justiﬁes us in believing that the soul is an explanatory principle, since we have good reason to
think that formal properties explain, and hence that formal substances are genuine substances. To identify soul with
form is to show why souls are also genuine substances.
By connecting the account of soul with his metaphysics Aristotle allows it to claim the support of ﬁrst philosophy and
strong dialectic. He might still, however, quite reasonably deny that his argument is non-dialectical. Though it is more
restrictive than pure dialectic needs to be, it does not rely on premisses that are simply imported from outside into
dialectical argument. The crucial claims in the account of soul are those that connect soul with life and appeal to the
teleological conception of life and nature. Aristotle does not think a teleological doctrine is inaccessible to dialectical
argument. On the contrary, he takes some awareness of teleology to be part of the appearances; he probably
underestimates the empirical character of the belief in teleology, and the scope for empirical challenges to it. Still, he
might reasonably defend it both as true and as part of any reasonable conception of nature; we cannot easily abandon
it without a radical alteration that we have no reason to entertain in our classiﬁcation of subjects. The argument,
therefore, appeals only to those common beliefs that we have some further reason, beyond common beliefs about the
soul, to think reliable. The further reason comes from the rest of our beliefs about nature.
In the Metaphysics we saw how Aristotle could lead dialectic from mere consistency with common beliefs to some
reasonable claim to

290

CHAPTER 13 § 155

objective truth; and we began our study of the De Anima to see if he offers the same sort of argument for his account
of the soul. We have found that he does.

155. Dualism
Aristotle discusses and rejects both the Presocratic assumption that the soul is some sort of body, and the Platonic
claim that it must be something entirely non-bodily. His own hylomorphic account (treating the body as matter and the
soul as form) is meant to show that these other views are not the only possible positions, and that hylomorphism is
preferable to both. We choose one of these extreme positions when we see the difﬁculties of the other; but Aristotle
suggests we need not choose either.
The two views he rejects seem fairly similar to materialism and dualism, as they appear in later discussions of mind and
body. A materialist argues that mental states are simply material states, and that a person (or other subject of mental
states) has no components apart from the material components of his body. A dualist argues that mental states must be
non-material states, and that therefore the material components of a person's body cannot be all his components. This
is a rather rough description of dualism and materialism, and each general position includes several more speciﬁc
versions that need to be distinguished. But it is useful to begin by looking for Aristotle's attitude to each position.27
He brieﬂy expresses his attitude to both positions, in the course of his discussion of Young Socrates, in Metaphysics vii
11. Young Socrates allows that any individual soul must exist in some body, but allows no closer relation between soul
and body than between circle and the particular bits of matter it is embodied in (Met. 1036b24–8). To this extent
Young Socrates is a dualist, arguing that the soul is not essentially material, and therefore not a material substance, even
if in fact no soul exists without a body. Aristotle argues against him that a soul essentially has a proximate organic body
(1036b28–30).28
Aristotle challenges dualism on teleological grounds. Something has psychic states to the extent that its behaviour can
be teleologically explained. We understand why parts, organs, structure, and other bodily processes of an animal are as
they are when we understand them in psychic terms. Equally, however, the soul is essentially the ﬁnal cause of the
body; we have no more fundamental account of the soul's nature than this. If states of the soul provide teleological
explanations of the animal's behaviour, they cannot belong to a body that is just

CHAPTER 13 § 155

291

coincidentally joined to the soul; hence we must reject one form of dualism. Aristotle's teleological conception
supports his objection to the Platonist view that any old soul can be associated with any old body (DA 407b20–4).29
Dualism identiﬁes the soul with a non-material component of the compound of body and soul. But Aristotle argues
that if soul is form, it cannot be simply a non-material component; for the presence of the component cannot be the
primary cause of the unity of the whole compound, whereas the form is the primary cause of the unity.
Now what is composed from something is composed so that the whole thing is one, not as a heap is, but as a
syllable is. A syllable is not its letters (stoicheia)—B and A are not the same thing as BA—and ﬂesh is not ﬁre and
earth; for when the components are dissolved, the ﬂesh or syllable no longer exists, although the letters or the ﬁre
and earth still exist. Hence the syllable is something, and it is not only the voiced letter and the voiceless, but some
further thing; and similarly, ﬂesh is not only ﬁre and earth, or the hot and cold, but some further thing.
Is this further thing an element (stoicheion) or composed from elements? If it is an element, there will be the same
argument all over again; for ﬂesh will be composed from this 〈new element〉, plus ﬁre and earth, plus some
further thing, so that it will go on to inﬁnity. If the further thing is composed from an element, it is clearly not
composed from one (since this one would be it), but from more than one; and then we will repeat the argument
about it as about ﬂesh or a syllable. It would seem, however, that this further thing is something other than an
element, and that it is the cause of one thing's being ﬂesh and another thing's being a syllable, and similarly in the
other cases. Now this is the substance of each things, for this is the primary cause of its being 〈what it is〉. (Met.
1041b11–28)
If we accept the connexion between soul and unity as a good reason for identifying soul with form, then we cannot
identify soul with an immaterial component that would simply raise the problem that soul is meant to solve (cf. DA
411b5–14).30
Aristotle rejects dualism, then, in so far as he refuses to identify the soul with an immaterial component of the living
organism. He recognizes the attraction of dualism, in so far as he sees why we might not want to identify the soul with
a material component of the body; but he thinks dualism reaches the wrong answer in adding to the material body an
immaterial component. In his view, the reasons for denying that the soul is a material component rest on the
connexion between soul and unity; and this connexion makes it equally reasonable to deny that the soul is an
immaterial component.31 The facts apparently supporting dualism, therefore, do not support it. We correctly believe
that psychic states are not reducible to purely material states, because psychic states

292

CHAPTER 13 § 155

have a teleological role that resists reduction. This hylomorphic, teleological conception of soul, as the primary source
of unity in a living body, may seem to require dualism, but actually excludes it.
It does not follow, however, that Aristotle rejects everything that a dualist wants to maintain; in particular he need not
deny that a living organism has some immaterial component, or even that the organism has a soul if and only if it has
an appropriate immaterial component.32 This quasi-dualist doctrine is not an account of the soul, since the immaterial
component is not itself the form of the living body; quasi-dualism describes the composition that is (supposedly)
necessary and sufﬁcient for a body to be ensouled.
The notion of a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for soul that is different from soul is familiar to Aristotle. He
suggests that the heart or brain might be the sort of component that is ‘crucial (kuria), in which the account and the
substance belong primarily’ (Met. 1035b25–7). This sort of primary component is neither prior nor posterior to the
(formal) compound living organism, since each depends on the other (hama, 1035b25).33 There is no living body
without a heart in working order, and no heart in working order without a body; and there is no heart that is not a
heart in working order, since a dead heart is a mere homonym. Now suppose that instead of, or as well as, a material
heart a person needs an immaterial component—call it a spirit—to have a soul. We could even claim that when the
person dies this component will survive his death. In that condition it will not be a spirit, except homonymously—let
us say it is an ex-spirit; and if any psychic functions are independent of bodily organs, it is possible for the ex-spirit to
exist with these functions. Hence what survives the compound we call ‘Socrates’ is not in fact, as Plato thought,
Socrates himself, but only Socrates' ex-spirit.
This degree of dualism is consistent with Aristotle's hylomorphism, and it might legitimately appeal to some dualists.34
For one source of doubt about materialism is doubt about the possibility of explaining all a person's actions by appeal
to things or processes with a purely material composition.35 Aristotle neither endorses this doubt nor claims that it is
completely unfounded.36 He offers no general argument to show that a spirit is not a necessary component of
explanatory things or processes.37
Such a concession to dualism does not weaken Aristotle's arguments against dualism. He argues that a reasonable
conception of the relation between the soul, life, and the unity of a living organism precludes the identiﬁcation of soul
with an immaterial component of the organism. If this point is conceded, the case for quasi-dualism depends on more
speciﬁc questions about possible explanations for different kinds of

CHAPTER 13 § 156

293

psychic states; and Aristotle wisely avoids trying to settle these speciﬁc questions through his general claims about the
nature of souls.

156. Materialism
Aristotle's dispute with Young Socrates gives his reason for rejecting both dualism and some forms of materialism. We
have taken dualism to assert that the material components of a person's body cannot be all his components, and we
have seen how someone might wrongly reach a dualist conclusion from the correct belief that the soul cannot be
identiﬁed with a material component. The extreme, eliminative materialist believes that there are no genuine formal
causes, and that therefore there are no formal psychic states. A less extreme, reductive materialist believes there are
such things as formal causes and formal states, but argues that these are to be identiﬁed with determinate types of
material states, so that we could in principle speak only of the material states to which the formal states have been
reduced. A still less extreme, non-reductive materialist believes that particular psychic states are identical to, or
composed of, particular material states, but are still distinct and irreducible states.38 It will be useful to keep these
different materialist views in mind in examining Aristotle's position.
His position needs to be interpreted carefully because of his views about matter. He agrees that an account of a human
being must mention some bodily parts; and we might argue that states of the soul are just states of these bodily parts.
But he does not commit himself to reductive materialism. For the relevant bodily parts and processes belong to the
proximate, not the remote, material body; they are the ensouled parts, not the parts described without reference to
these psychic properties. The parts that have the capacities actualized in the vital activities are the ensouled parts, not
their material constituents.
Aristotle, therefore, makes no signiﬁcant concession to reductive materialism, since the proximate body is itself
essentially ensouled. Having a soul is not simply a condition of a body, since it must be a condition of a proximate,
ensouled body. Nor can psychic states simply be states of bodily parts, since they must be states of ensouled
bodily parts.
Reductive materialists will not easily eliminate this reference to the soul from the account of the bodily parts. To
eliminate it they must show that the laws and explanations stated in teleological terms can be reduced to nonteleological laws and explanations; and this may not be easy to show. The kinds of substances, events, and
processes recognized

294

CHAPTER 13 § 156

in teleological explanations will not be recognized in non-teleological explanations; and it is rather bold to expect that
the non-teleological laws will apply to kinds that actually correspond to the kinds conforming to teleological laws. An
account of digestion will mention teleologically equivalent organs in different animals and species of animals, but the
material composition of these organs may be different, and so the explanations referring to it may be different.
If the soul were identical to a remote body, or to a phase of it, rather than to a proximate body, then a reductive
position would be plausible. For in this case there would be reason to recognize souls, but no reason to recognize them
as substances distinct from remote bodies. We could then say that Socrates' soul exists just as long as this remote body
exists, or else that it is a coincident of the remote body (parallel to the whiteness of a white man), which can perish
without causing the body to perish too. Aristotle, however, does not identify the soul with the remote body, but only
with the proximate body. The soul outlives several remote bodies; and one remote body outlives the soul. But the soul
is an exact contemporary of its proximate body; and this cannot be deﬁned without reference to soul and cannot exist
without having soul. Hence the identiﬁcation of the soul with the proximate body does not imply a reductive
materialist conception of the soul; neither the soul nor the proximate body is either identical to or a coincident of a
remote body.39
If there are irreducible laws about states of soul, then irreducible psychic properties are mentioned in these laws. We
may still agree that the subjects of these mental properties are also material, if we reject immaterialism about the soul;
but they are no more purely material than they are purely psychic. Moreover, acceptance of Aristotle's argument about
souls requires us to recognize subjects that we would not have to recognize otherwise, even though these are not
immaterial subjects. A particular organism is a particular form that exists as long as the same set of vital activities
continues. It is contemporary with, even identical to, the proximate body that is deﬁned by reference to the soul. It is
not contemporary with the remote body that is deﬁned by reference to the material constituents. If a reductive
materialist account were correct, we would have no reason to recognize souls and proximate bodies as well as remote
bodies.
Aristotle is not a non-reductionist about minds only, but about souls in general, and indeed about forms in general.
Human beings with mental states are no more irreducible to their remote matter than animals and plants are; and if
artifacts have forms, these too are irreducible to their remote matter. Materialists about the mind may reply that the
issue concerning them is not the one illustrated by plants

CHAPTER 13 § 156

295

and hammers; surely the sense in which these things are found to be irreducible to matter is not much help to the
opponent of any materialism that is worth defending? If Aristotle's argument is sound, the materialists are wrong; the
issues that they thought were different turn out to be the same, and if they reject reduction for teleological systems in
general, they must reject it for minds too.
Materialism, however, need not be reductive; and if it is not, it is untouched by these arguments. Non-reductive
materialism insists that everything must be composed entirely of material components; and such ‘compositional
materialism’ is as clear as ‘component’ and ‘material’ are. It is neither inconsistent with nor implied by Aristotle's
conception of soul; for we saw that his conception leaves quite open the possibility of spiritual components.40 Aristotle
has further empirical arguments for accepting compositional materialism for some psychic states and rejecting it for
others; but we could accept his general conception of soul without accepting these further arguments.
Though Aristotle does not endorse compositional materialism, his account of the soul makes it more attractive, by
removing some reasons for thinking it cannot be true. If we identify soul and body with form and matter, we can see
why compositional materialism might be true about souls. For some forms realized in matter do not at all tempt us to
be immaterialists; we do not think a hammer must have an immaterial component just because it is not reducible to its
material components. If the features of the soul inconsistent with eliminative and reductive materialism are explained
by the hylomorphic conception of soul, they do not justify rejection of compositional materialism in favour of dualism.
On the other hand, and for similar reasons, the hylomorphic account of soul shows us how quasi-dualism might be
true even if dualism is false. Indeed, quasi-dualism is simply the immaterialist analogue of compositional materialism,
arguing that the relevant component must be different from the recognized kinds of matter.41 Aristotle's argument for
hylomorphism does not settle this issue between different views of the composition of the soul.
Aristotle wants to show that ﬁrst philosophy can persuade us to reject both dualism and the eliminative and reductive
versions of materialism. But the most important part of his doctrine is his positive account of the soul as formal cause.
This positive account can be accepted by those who disagree about materialism and dualism, provided that they qualify
the dualist or materialist claims so as to avoid the arguments that Aristotle has challenged.

296

CHAPTER 13 § 157

157. Empirical Argument, Dialectic, and First Philosophy
Aristotle characteristically distinguishes the sorts of ‘appearances’ that are the basis of empirical argument from those
that are the starting-point of dialectic.42 The study of the soul offers a useful test of this distinction. For Aristotle argues
that the dialectician and the student of nature deﬁne psychic states differently, and that the student of nature mentions
the matter that the dialectician leaves out (403a24–b19). In the De Anima he largely avoids empirical argument about
the material basis of psychic states. In doing so, he shows that he thinks empirical argument is not the proper concern
of dialectic and ﬁrst philosophy.
Aristotle's arguments about dualism and materialism support his views about the relation of dialectic to empirical
evidence. For these arguments tend to separate the empirical issues that are involved in deciding between
compositional materialism and quasi-dualism from the less empirical considerations that support a hylomorphic theory
against its dualist and materialist rivals. The arguments for the hylomorphic theory are largely a priori, as we ought to
expect if they are drawn from ﬁrst philosophy. If states of the soul are parts of the formal and ﬁnal cause, then ﬁrst
philosophy shows that the soul is a substance, and therefore irreducible to remote matter. The arguments from ﬁrst
philosophy are not completely a priori; we have noticed that Aristotle's belief in the reality of formal and ﬁnal causes
depends on some empirically falsiﬁable assumptions.43 But it depends on relatively few and uncontroversial
assumptions; it does not rely on the more detailed empirical arguments that are needed to decide between quasidualism and compositional materialism.
To this extent the method of the De Anima is dialectical, and therefore suitable for the philosophical questions
discussed here, while the more detailed empirical issues treated in the Parva Naturalia are examined through far more
obviously empirical arguments. Aristotle shows good judgment about the kinds of questions he can expect to settle by
dialectical argument. If he were going to discuss the matter as well as the form, dialectic would not be so suitable. An
account of the relevant physiological processes would require empirical detail going beyond common beliefs. For a
formal account, however, dialectic seems suitable, since such an account need not rely on detailed information about
physiological processes. An account of the formal cause requires knowledge of what an organism does; and though
common sense is not fully informed about this, it is less likely to be totally astray. Inquiry into the material cause must
be largely empirical, while inquiry into the formal cause may be largely dialectical.

CHAPTER 13 § 157

297

Aristotle does not seek a merely dialectical account of psychic states, since his methods are not merely dialectical. First
philosophy does not simply collect the common beliefs, or take them for granted, or simply try to make them
consistent; and for its aims the ordinary dialectical account would be insufﬁcient. Dialecticians deﬁne states of the soul
simply with reference to the associated behaviour.
If this is so, then it is clear that the attributes are accounts involving matter. Hence the 〈right〉 sort of deﬁning
formula will be: ‘Being angry is a certain movement of this sort of body or party or capacity by this agency for the
sake of this’. Hence study of the soul—either every sort or the particular sort 〈that requires a body〉—turns out
to be a task for the student of nature. Now the student of nature and the dialectician would give different
deﬁnitions of each of these attributes—e.g. of anger. The dialectician would deﬁne it as desire for inﬂicting pain in
return for pain; and the student of nature as boiling of the blood and the hot element around the heart. The student
of nature describes the matter, and the dialectician describes the form and the account; for this 〈desire etc.〉 is
the account of the thing, but its existence requires this sort of matter. Similarly, one account of a house says that it is
a shelter preventing destruction by wind, rain, or heat; another will say that it is stones, bricks, and timber; another
will say that it is the form in these 〈stones etc.〉 for the sake of this end 〈preventing destruction〉. Then which
of these people is the student of nature—the one concerned with the matter in ignorance of the account, or the one
concerned only with the account? Or is he more properly the one who mentions both form and matter? Then what
is each of the ﬁrst two? (403a24–b9)
Aristotle describes the dialectical deﬁnition as an account of the form alone but this description is somewhat
misleading; for if we agree that states of the soul are materiate forms, a deﬁnition that fails to mention this fact will not
describe the sort of forms that they are.
An accurate description of the form, then, will have to mention the matter. But it need not mention matter in the way
that Aristotle's example suggests, referring to the physiological processes assumed to underlie anger. Such an account
mentions the remote matter, whereas we give the right account of the materiate form by mentioning the proximate
matter. First philosophy shows us that the form is the ﬁnal cause of the matter; to deﬁne states that are part of the
form we need to describe them as ﬁnal causes of the proximate matter, and so the deﬁnition must mention proximate
matter. On the other hand, it need not mention remote matter, since this is not needed to indicate that the form is a
ﬁnal cause. Our deﬁnition must describe a formal compound, or materiate form, not a material compound including
remote matter.44
Here, no less than in the Metaphysics, Aristotle's initial question, ‘Should the deﬁnition mention the form or the matter?’
presents only two sharply contrasted options, but his theory requires us to recognize

298

CHAPTER 13 § 157

more options. In the De Anima we must recognize these further options if we are to see how ﬁrst philosophy differs
both from mere dialectic and from empirical natural science. First philosophy seeks to show that common beliefs
about the soul are roughly right if a teleological conception of the soul is right; such a conception requires us to
recognize psychic states as ﬁnal causes actualizing the proximate potentialities of the proximate matter. We need not be
surprised that the De Anima does not describe at the outset the possibility that Aristotle eventually accepts; it begins
with a fairly intuitive contrast between form and matter, but ﬁrst philosophy shows why the contrast needs to be more
complicated.
The strategy of ﬁrst philosophy requires a modiﬁcation of common beliefs that dialectic does not require. The
Metaphysics requires us to deny the status of complete substance to some things—heaps and parts of animals—that
might have seemed to deserve it. The De Anima requires us to be more generous than we are normally inclined to be,
and to allow souls to plants. We must extend our initial belief that the soul is a principle of animals to allow that it is the
principle of life as a whole. The modiﬁcations of common beliefs are defended as the best way to extract the truth
from common beliefs as a whole. We do not think souls are totally homonymous in the different types of creatures that
have them; and we suppose that the different parts and capacities of the soul are parts and capacities of the same
subject. These views are reasonable if they are understood with the help of Aristotle's conception of soul.
If, then, we want to contrast ﬁrst philosophy and its method both with dialectic and with empirical science, our answer
cannot be completely tidy. If we accept the broad and not absolutely sharp distinction between dialectical and empirical
appearances, we must add some further empirical element to the dialectical appearances, in order to reach the
arguments of ﬁrst philosophy applied to nature. The teleological assumptions that determine the metaphysical
interpretation of substance, form, and matter, and therefore of soul, are empirically falsiﬁable. On the other hand, such
assumptions are different from the empirical information relevant to an inquiry into the material basis of psychic
states. Aristotle's inquiry into the soul is especially useful for our purposes, since it displays the different contributions
of dialectic, ﬁrst philosophy, and empirical science. His arguments for his hylomorphic conception, and his implicit
attitude to different versions of dualism and materialism, show that he understands the nature and force of his
arguments.

CHAPTER 13 § 158

299

158. Soul and Mind
Aristotle's account of soul avoids the less plausible aspects of dualism and of some versions of materialism. But his
solution should satisfy us only if it rests on a reasonable account of psychic states. He must show not only that his
account justiﬁes common beliefs about the soul by appeal to ﬁrst philosophy, but also that if we construe a state of the
soul as part of the formal cause, we correctly grasp the nature of that state. To see if he is right on this' point, we need
to examine his account of different psychic states and types of souls.
Aristotle himself agrees that this is necessary. Souls form a hierarchy, in which the lower type of psychic state is
necessary for the higher type and the higher soul is potentially the lower.
Clearly, then, soul will have one single account in the same way that a ﬁgure has; for just as ﬁgure is nothing besides
the triangle and those that follow in order, so equally the soul is nothing besides those 〈capacities〉 we have
mentioned. Still, we can ﬁnd a common account of ﬁgure that ﬁts all of them, and is special to none; and the same
is true for the souls. It is ridiculous, then, in these and other such cases, to search for a common account that is not
special to any being, and does not ﬁt the proper and undivided species, if 〈in our search〉 we neglect this
〈special〉 account. Hence we must ask what the soul of each particular 〈kind of thing〉—e.g. a plant, a human
being, or a beast—is. What is true of the soul is rather similar to what is true of ﬁgure; for in both cases the earlier is
potentially present in its successor, e.g. the triangle in the square, and the nutritive in the perceptive. (414b20–33)45
To understand each type of soul is to understand the speciﬁc way these speciﬁc psychic states are the form of this
speciﬁc sort of creature.
The nutritive soul ﬁts the general account well, since the account supports the rather unintuitive attribution of souls to
plants. It is easy to see how the nutritive and reproductive capacities are part of the creature's formal and ﬁnal cause.46
At the next stage, however, when Aristotle comes to discuss perception, we might be dissatisﬁed.
His account should apparently capture the distinctive features of mental states; we might, indeed, assume that it should
make psychic states coextensive with the mental states we intuitively recognize. His initial examples of psychic states
are recognizable mental states, and in treating the soul as the source of movement and perception, he almost picks out
mental states. But to conﬁne psychic states to mental states would conﬂict with Aristotle's teleological conception of
soul; and he claims that the processes of nutrition, digestion, and growth that go on without any mental states—even
in creatures that have mental states—will be states of those creatures' souls.
Aristotle must violate intuitions to some degree by treating nutritive

300

CHAPTER 13 § 158

states as states of the soul. But he can still isolate mental states among psychic states, if he can show that they
characteristically and essentially play some particular sort of teleological role. If he can show this, he will be right to
claim that the teleological aspect of psychic states is essential to them and the clue to understanding their nature.
When we say x does F for the sake of G, we imply that G is causally relevant to x's doing F; that is, the fact that F
produces G is part of the causal explanation of x's doing F.47 If x is an artifact, then teleological explanation will
sometimes lead us to a causal explanation mentioning a state of the artifact itself, but will always eventually lead us to
an intention of the designer. If we say ‘Thermostats turn the heat on and off to keep the room at a constant
temperature’, we refer to some mechanism in the thermostat that has been designed for this purpose by the designer; if
it has not, our claim was false. If the instrument maintained itself in this condition for efﬁcient turning on and off, we
would have some reason for saying it had a soul.
Teleological explanation of a plant does not imply an external designer; it refers to a state of the plant that is what it is
because of the goal it promotes. Here the actual past effects of this type of state explain, if we accept a theory of
evolution, why the plant has this state now. Since the plant maintains these goal-directed states in itself without the
deliberate intervention of some external agency to alter the plant's workings, we are more inclined to attribute life and
soul to the plant than to a thermostat.
With an animal the teleological explanation is different. It is true that plants put down roots to get water and that lions
approach water to get water. With plants we assume some past causal connexion between putting down roots and
getting water. With the lion we assume a causal connexion between the movement and a previous desire and
perception that focus on getting water. The ‘focussing’ is not merely the result of the past behaviour of the lion's
ancestors; it is a feature of the state itself. Plants are not organized to do what seems best to them, or what seems to
them to promote their survival, but to do what actually tends to promote their survival.48 A lion, however, is
teleologically organized to do what appears desirable to it. The lion acts to get what seems to it to be water, and the
apparent, not the real, existence of the water explains the action. Hence it is possible to deceive the lion, though not the
plant.
This is the sort of creature to which Aristotle attributes ‘appearance’, phantasia; and these states associated with
appearance seem to be coextensive with those we intuitively regard as mental. Perceptions, feelings, thoughts, and
desires are all associated with appearance, and a condition that captures all these states is a plausible condition for
having mental states.

CHAPTER 13 § 158

301

Aristotle is entitled to a still stronger claim. If we tried to ascribe sensations or thoughts to a being without any way that
things appeared to it, we would be puzzled. To have things appear a particular way is to have a particular point of view
on things; and that seems to be just a way of describing the subjective point of view that is plausibly regarded as
characteristic of mental states. While things are good or bad for a plant, they are not literally good or bad from the
plant's point of view, but only from the point of view of someone considering the good of the plant. But things are
desirable or undesirable from the lion's point of view, not only from the point of view of someone considering the
good of the lion.
Does this account of mental states really explain what they are? Can we understand the notion of appearing or seeming
that Aristotle appeals to, without already grasping the sort of thing that a mental state is?
It may be true that to grasp the notion of appearance that Aristotle relies on, we must be able to recognize some
mental states. But even so, the explanans is not too unhelpfully close to the explanandum. An appearance expresses a
point of view, a selective description of an object. Selective descriptions themselves do not require mental states. An
egg-sorting machine that ﬁrst separates large eggs and then stamps them ‘large’ is selectively describing them. But it
has no mental states, since its selective descriptions are not formed in the right way from previous selective
descriptions; no comparison of this egg with previous ones causes its present description, and so it does not look to
the sorting machine as though the egg is large. An appearance, by contrast, is a selective description of an object,
caused by the appropriate transition from previous selective descriptions.49
If the transition is appropriate for appearances, the present descriptions must be affected by the content of previous
descriptions. The physical characteristics of a painting affect me if I am knocked over when it falls on me or the fumes
from the varnish choke me. But it is a picture of, say, Pericles; the depiction of Pericles is its content, and I am affected
by the content if, e.g., Pericles in the picture looks imposing, I suppose the picture is accurate, and I comment that
Pericles must have looked imposing. A system that is affected by the content of its previous selective descriptions is to
that extent a claimant to appearances and mental states. It is not enough to be affected, as some machines might be, by
a physical state of an object that is correlated with some content—if, e.g., a machine could reliably detect statues of
Pericles by tracing their shape; the content itself must be part of the explanation of later selective descriptions.50
Aristotle does not explicitly raise or answer a question about the nature of mental states. Still, his initial examples of
psychic states are

302

CHAPTER 13 § 158

familiar mental states; and in connecting them with appearance, he offers a plausible account of what they have in
common. In perceptive and rational creatures, ﬁnal causation works through appearances, since these creatures are
teleologically organized to pursue apparent objects of desire in response to their appearances. If Aristotle's conception
of soul explains what mental states have in common, that is another point in support of his conception of the soul as
form.
We should therefore follow Aristotle's advice and proceed from his general claims about soul and body to his account
of different psychic states; for this account will itself be part of the argument for his general claims. If a creature's soul
is its form, then each psychic state must be part of the form. Such an approach to psychic states should help us to
distinguish the features of mental states, and to see how one mental state differs from another.

14 Soul and Mind
159. Perception as a State of the Soul
Aristotle's views on sense-perception offer a test of his account of soul and mind. If sensory states are part of an
animal's formal cause, then they should be mentioned in a teleological explanation of its behaviour. Moreover, sensory
states are also mental states; they involve appearance, the sort of awareness that distinguishes animals from plants.
Aristotle ought to explain why perceptual states have these apparent features.
Aristotle's account of the soul seeks to show the common feature of souls and to remove the suspicion that having a
soul might be a merely homonymous property, not a genuine common property of creatures with souls. He has a
similar task with perception, since he takes perception to be a single faculty of the soul. He should display the unity of
the faculty in the different sorts of animals that have it. There should be something, for instance, about touch that
makes it clearly the same capacity in an amoeba, a cow, and a man. The perceptive faculty is shared by rational and
non-rational animals; and a common account of perception should show that it is not a mere homonym that is present
in non-rational animals. The general account of perception should require no more than can be ascribed to nonrational animals, and in rational animals the account should not be falsiﬁed by the distinctive features of rational
perception.
Since perception is part of a teleological account of an animal, it should be good for the animal; unless its acting for the
sake of some end resulted fairly often in actual beneﬁt to it, we would lose our reason for attributing ﬁnal causation to
it. Aristotle begins from his usual assumption that nature does nothing pointlessly.1 Sometimes, admittedly, an
organism has some particular property because of its matter or because of some side-effect of a process that beneﬁts
the organism; and in these cases we have not found part of the form. If perception is part of the form, it should
beneﬁt the perceiver.
Aristotle ﬁnds it fairly easy to defend this claim for perception. Animals respond more ﬂexibly and effectively to
situations if they perceive their environment than if they have to be affected by physical interaction as plants are; a dog
can move towards water in different

304

CHAPTER 14 § 159

situations when it sees water, but a plant cannot do much if it puts its roots down for water that is not there.2
If perception is to beneﬁt animals, we cannot ascribe it to them without making other assumptions as well. Suppose,
for instance, that perceptions were always false, or that the animal could not act on them, or that it was always perverse
and disregarded its perceptions in its action. In each of these cases the animal's perception would be no good to it, and
to rule out such cases Aristotle must insist on ascribing perception only when other states can also be ascribed.
Without some assumptions connecting perceptions with desires and with the actual good of the animal, we will not
know what perceptions to ascribe to it at all. If we suppose that an animal wants to kill itself but does not succeed, we
can suppose that it systematically misperceives things—that when it drinks it has mistaken the water for poison, or has
not seen the water at all, and just blunders into it. Unlimited and variable perversity of desires is even worse, since we
can link it with unlimited variety in the perceptions ascribed. And if perception always results in harm, what has the
animal perceived? Perhaps its perceptions have been right and its desires perverse or its desires have been sound but
the perceptions mistaken; and many varieties of mistaken perceptions can be assumed. We have some systematic way
of ascribing perceptions only when we have some connexion with action, and the kind of connexion that fairly
regularly secures the animal's beneﬁt. Aristotle's teleological assumptions can be defended without appeal to his
doctrines about cosmic order in nature.
Aristotle therefore believes that perception requires desire.
While plants have only the nutritive part, other things have this and the perceptive part also; and if they have the
perceptive part, they also have the desiring part. For desire includes appetite, emotion, and wish; and whatever has
any perception has pleasure and pain, and ﬁnds things pleasant or painful, and therefore has appetite, which is
desire for the pleasant. Moreover all animals have perception of food, since touch is perception of food, . . . 〈and
therefore have pleasure and appetite〉. (DA 414a32–b7)
It would not be enough if perception somehow systematically triggered actions, in the way that a loud noise may make
me jump even if I am not frightened by it, for the action might be quite unrelated to any good for the animal. Desire
links perception with the animal's good. The animal desires pleasure and the avoidance of pain; it is capable of acting
on its desires, and Aristotle assumes that the action will in general be beneﬁcial. Hence every animal with perception
must also have desire.
The same sort of argument shows why perception requires appearance (phantasia). Since perception requires desire,
and desire requires

CHAPTER 14 § 160

305

appearance, perception requires appearance (413b22–4).3 Creatures that have appearances have a point of view on
their environment; they can respond to particular features of it without the normal sort of physical interaction with
those features (as, e.g., animals respond to the presence of water before the water wets them). If such a response
contributes to the creature's good, it requires a fairly accurate sort of contact, different from ordinary physical
interaction, with the environment, and a fairly successful way of using this contact for the creature's good. ‘Contact’
and ‘using’ indicate vaguely the physic states that should be described more clearly in an account of perception and
desire.

160. Perception as Process and Activity
Aristotle deﬁnes the soul in general as a ﬁrst actuality, and therefore as a potentiality for second actuality. Since
perception is one part of the soul it will also be a potentiality for second actuality (417a21–9).
It is easy to assume that actually perceiving is a movement or process (417a14–17), but Aristotle gradually modiﬁes
this assumption (417a30–b6, 431a4–7). He never denies that actual perception includes or requires a process, but he
claims that it cannot be just a process.4 Even if ‘F’ and ‘G’ are coextensive, it does not follow that a potentiality for F is
also a potentiality for G; for the property of being G may not be the property of the actuality that stands in the right
explanatory relation to the potentiality. Hence, even if every perceiving is also a process of alteration, it does not follow
that it is a perceiving because it is a process, or that to perceive is to undergo a process; for we may not ﬁnd that a
process stands in the right explanatory relation to the potentiality.
Aristotle argues that the actualization of a second potentiality (the transition from ﬁrst to second actuality) is not an
alteration (417a30–b2).5 For being altered or affected is essentially the destruction of one contrary by another, e.g. of
cold by hot.6 Every change in a subject actualizes some potentiality in the subject, in so far as only a subject capable of
being heated can cease to be cold and become hot; but it does not follow that the features of a sequence of events that
make it a process or change (kinêsis) also make it the actualization of another sort of potentiality. A change in a subject
requires a passive potentiality for being affected by external objects; and Aristotle believes that such a view of
perception does not capture its essence.
A comparison with nutrition explains the point. Nutrition might seem to be a passive potentiality, since it requires the
subject to be affected in certain ways by the air, water, or soil in its environment. But the essential feature of
nourishment is what it does for the organism, not how it results from being affected by the environment. For it is

306

CHAPTER 14 § 160

essentially a capacity to maintain the organism with its form, tending towards its ﬁnal cause; the fact that it can do this
only as a result of alteration by the environment is inessential, though causally necessary, to the nutritive character of
the potentiality.
A similar argument explains why perception is not merely a process. Goal-directed potentialities essentially tend to
advance the subject's ends; they do not essentially tend to replace one of its properties with another as a result of
interaction with an external object. For this reason perception cannot be a mere passive potentiality to be affected by
external objects. Indeed Aristotle would have made his point clearer if he had shown how it holds for all potentialities
of the soul, not simply for perception (cf. Phys. 246a10–b2). Since the soul is the form, and since the processes of
alteration, coming to be and destruction are not essential to formal states, the actualities of the soul are not processes.
A form has to come into existence from some process involving the material compound that constitutes it; but it is not
itself the subject whose properties explain the actual process of becoming. Similarly, formal states arise only in the
processes that constitute them; but they are not themselves essentially processes, but tendencies towards the ﬁnal
cause, or, as the Physics says, ‘completions’ (246a13).
Aristotle adds that the acquisition of a ﬁrst potentiality by learning from a teacher should not be called a way of being
affected, or else we should recognize a type of alteration that is not the deprivation of a contrary but the acquisition of
a state and of something's nature (417b9–16).7 He means that the acquisition is more than a deprivation, not that it is
not a deprivation at all. When a subject learns, the learning is an actualization of his potentiality and the fulﬁlment of
his nature. The subject is the way he is for the sake of having and using some sort of knowledge. If he were trained
instead to walk with a limp or to repeat nonsense syllables, he would be trained to do something that is possible for
him, but he would not be fulﬁlling a potentiality or developing towards his own nature.
Aristotle sees some temptation to agree with dualists in denying that perception is any sort of bodily process, but he
denies that the truth underlying the temptation really supports dualism. We are right to distinguish perception from its
underlying material process, because the essential features of the remote material process are not the essential features
of the goal-directed state that perception is. Since organisms are constructed to gain the beneﬁts of perceiving,
perceiving is an actualization of their natural potentiality; it is part of an animal's form, the ﬁnal cause of its structures
and organs. Aristotle solves the puzzle about perceptions and processes by appeal to his general views on form.

CHAPTER 14 § 161

307

161. The Accounts of Perception
Aristotle should also show how perception is part of the formal and ﬁnal cause. In general, perception beneﬁts an
animal by allowing it to react more selectively and successfully to relevant features of the external world than it
otherwise would; and it reacts better because in some way and to some extent its own states correspond to states of the
external world. But it is more difﬁcult to say what sort of correspondence this is.
The account of perception as a process seemed attractive because we tend to assume that perception involves some
sort of causal interaction. But not every sort of interaction implies perception; when plants interact with the soil and
are nourished, they do not perceive anything in the soil.
If we assume that perception involves both causal interaction and useful correspondence with the external world, we
might at ﬁrst take it to be a sort of similarity produced by the interaction. A feature of an external object is somehow
accessible to perceivers; and we might infer that it, or at least something similar, is somehow actually present in them.
Hence some Presocratics assume that perception is to be explained by the literal similarity of the perceiving agent and
the perceived object, so that my composition (e.g. the four elements) corresponds to the composition of the external
world. Though Aristotle easily shows that mere material similarity explains nothing, he still appeals to correspondence
and similarity.8 Since accurate perceptions are true of the external world, the correspondence that underlies truth must
also be present in perception.9
Aristotle offers three formulae for the understanding of perception. The ﬁrst shows that he takes similarity seriously:
F1. The perceiver becomes like the object (417a18, 418a5).
This formula implies that in truly perceiving the actual perceptible qualities (colours, smells, tastes, etc.) of things in the
world we become similar to them on the right occasions. But F1 seems to have strange results. I become like white
paint if a tin of it is spilt over me; or, if I peel onions, my hands acquire the smell of onions. But this sort of passive
affection and this sort of similarity do not imply perception (424b12–18).10
Seeing this objection to F1, Aristotle offers a second formula:
F2. The perceiver that was potentially F (e.g. white) becomes actually F when it perceives the actually F object
(418a3, 422a7, b15, 423b30, 424a2).
If a tin of white paint is spilt over me, I become white, but I do not realize a natural potentiality of mine. F2, however,
insists that genuine

308

CHAPTER 14 § 161

perception is the sort of similarity that actualizes a natural potentiality of mine. My being whitened by the paint realizes
a passive potentiality to be affected by an external object, which in this case coincidentally makes me similar to it; but
the event does not actualize any potentiality to become similar to the object. F2 restricts F1 to actualizations of a
potentiality to become similar. On this view, perception is good for the animal in so far as it allows it to respond
appropriately to features of the world; hence the becoming similar that is involved in perception will be the
actualization of a natural potentiality. Appropriate response is the result of the assimilation; hence we have the
potentiality for the assimilation.
It is not clear, though, that F2 restricts F1 to genuine cases of perception. When I drink water, my body gets wetter,
but I do not necessarily perceive water; the nutritive part of my soul is involved, but the perceptive part need not be.11
Aristotle therefore modiﬁes F2.
F3. The perceiver acquires the form, but not the matter, of the object (424a18–24, 425b23, 431b29).
F3 is meant to explain why plants do not count as perceivers:
This is why plants do not perceive, even though they have a part of the soul and are affected in some way by
tangible things, since they are heated and cooled; the reason is that they have no intermediate condition and no
principle of the sort that can receive the forms of perceptible objects, but they are affected together with the matter.
(424a32–b3)
Aristotle does not mean that my matter is quite unchanged when I perceive an object, or that there is no process of
material interaction involving me and the object; he means that the similarity between me and the object does not
consist in my matter being affected in the way that makes my causal powers similar to those of the object.12
In speaking of the form ‘in the perceiver’, and in the perceiver's soul, Aristotle needs to distinguish a form of F that
realizes F from a form that expresses F.13 Consider a wooden hammer, a steel hammer, a picture, a sculpture, and a plan
of a hammer. The wooden and the steel hammer both realize the same form, since they are both made for the same
function. The other things do not realize the same form, since none of them is made for the same function (even if the
sculptor happens to sculpt something that would serve as a hammer). But they have something in common with the
actual hammers; we may say that they express the form of a hammer, in the sense that we could infer from them what
a hammer would have to be like. Expressions need not be very similar to each other or to their realizations—Austria is
not very like a painting or aerial photograph or map or written description of

CHAPTER 14 § 161

309

Austria; but all of them have something in common that makes them all expressions of Austria. To this extent all the
expressions are similar to the expression that is also the realization.14
But if expression simply requires some appropriate correspondence, it will include more than perception. Perhaps my
eating causes my digestive states to correspond in some way to the states of the cheese I ate; e.g. if it contains fats and
carbohydrates, the fat-digesting and carbohydrate-digesting digestive states correspond to its states. We might even say
that my digestive states partially express the cheese, just as the line on the chart of a barograph expresses the changing
atmospheric pressure, or in general the states of a measuring instrument express what it measures; in all these cases we
might also say that one thing is sensitive to the states of the other.15
These cases do not require the presence of the form without the matter. My digestive states corresponding to the states
of the cheese may in turn cause me to do other things; but their correspondence to the cheese is causally irrelevant.
Digestion affects other bodily processes because of its chemical effects and its teleological role; its correspondence to
the cheese is no part of the explanation. If, by contrast, the immaterial form of the house is in the builder's soul, then
the state of her soul expresses the house; it causes the realization of the house; and its character as expression is
relevant to the stages of the building of the house, since she builds as she does because she wants to build a house with
the features that are in her design of the house. In this case we have some reason to say that an immaterial form is
actually present.
The points of correspondence between the state and the object constitute the content of the state; and so we can say
that it expresses through its content. Hence a state of perceiving red will affect my reaction to red things because of its
content. If a dog regularly eats red meat, and then tries to eat red rubber that is roughly similar to meat in size, shape,
and smell, but refuses anything with two of these qualities that lacks the other one, we have some reason to infer that it
perceives the colour, taste, and smell of meat and other things, and, in particular, that it sees red. It sees red if it reacts
to red things in ways that are best explained by this content of its psychic states.
If, then, F3 captures the difference between perceivers and non-perceivers, it shows why Aristotle's account of
particular psychic states must depend on his general view of the soul as formal and ﬁnal cause.16 We cannot examine
the intrinsic features of a creature's particular psychic state in isolation from others, and decide whether it has absorbed
the form of an object without the matter. To distinguish the subject that perceives from the instrument that merely
records we have to look at the rest of its behaviour, and see if it should be explained by

310

CHAPTER 14 § 162

reference to the content of its states. To apply this test we must have some conception of the appropriate sort of
explanation to seek; and Aristotle tells us the appropriate sort when he claims that the soul is the formal and
ﬁnal cause.

162. Form and Matter in Perception
The three formulae explaining the nature of perception reﬂect the dialectical character of Aristotle's argument. If the
De Anima is a largely dialectical account of the soul as form, it should not rely heavily on empirical details about the
process of perception, since such empirical details will belong to an account of the matter.17 On the other hand, the
form is the ﬁnal cause of the matter, realizing its proximate potentiality; and the matter that has the proximate
potentiality for the formal activities is the proximate matter, not the remote matter that constitutes it. An account of
the form, therefore, should include some account of the proximate matter.18
Aristotle applies the three formulae of perception to the sense-organ that is part of the matter, as well as to the faculty
of perception that is part of the form of the animal.19 The sense-organ as proximate matter is distinct from its
constituent matter. Qua sense-organ and proximate matter, it must have the properties that allow the faculty and its
actualization to belong to it. F1 and F2 imply that the organ becomes like the object, and all along has potentially the
qualities of the object that it has actually in perception. We can infer that the organ is potentially hot and becomes
actually hot in perception, and so on for all other perceptible qualities.
The sense becomes like the object in so far as it acquires the form without the matter of the object; and this same
restriction on likeness must be applied to the sense-organ as well.
On the other hand, tangible 〈qualities〉 and ﬂavours do affect bodies; otherwise, what would affect and alter
soulless things? Then will the other objects of perception also affect bodies? Perhaps not every body is liable to be
affected by smell and sound, and those that are affected are indeﬁnite and impermanent—e.g. air, since it acquires a
smell as though affected in some way. Then what is there to smelling, beyond being affected? Perhaps smelling is
〈not only being affected, but〉 also perceiving, while air that is affected 〈by smell〉, by contrast, soon becomes
an object of perception. (424b12–18)
The perceiver who ‘acquires’ the smell of cheese by perceiving it does not necessarily himself become smelly; nor does
his nose. Aristotle seems to think that what happens to the air around the cheese is the sort of ‘being affected with the
matter’ (424b2–3) that is not a necessary feature of perception.20

CHAPTER 14 § 163

311

Aristotle's formal and dialectical account of perception conﬁnes itself largely to common beliefs.21 These same beliefs,
however, imply further empirical claims. We might claim to know a priori that sense-perception requires a causal
process involving features of external objects and features of the perceiver—perhaps even features of the perceiver's
body—so that, for example, if we believe we see colours, we must also believe that there is some causal process linking
coloured objects and ourselves. We may not know, however, how the process works; we may know only that it fails if
some conditions are not normal (cf. e.g. 419a1–15).22
Aristotle's formal account is not beyond conceivable empirical refutation. It would be false if at least one of these
claims were false: (1) Reception of the form without the matter of the perceptible qualities sometimes results from a
causal interaction between one of these qualities and a perceiver. (2) This reception of the form affects the behaviour
of the perceivers by its content, in ways that beneﬁt perceivers.
Neither of these claims is true in all logically possible worlds. But they are not as easily refutable as the physiological
aspects of Aristotle's account. To reject the formal account we would have to change our conception of the world so
that it would no longer include perception. Such a change would be so sweeping that we would ﬁnd difﬁculty in
conceiving its consequences, and in saying how we could have good reason to make such a change. In particular, if we
were to have evidence to justify us in rejecting these claims about perception, would we not need to believe we were
getting some of it through perception? If we deny ourselves perception, we seem to deny ourselves some of the
evidence to support the theory that denies us perception, and hence we seem to challenge the theory itself.23
While it is logically possible for the formal account of perception to be false, it is hard to see how we could have reason
to believe that it is false. If Aristotle can safely appeal to this sort of argument, then his formal account of perception is
quite resilient in the face of different views about its empirical basis. This is the sort of account he ought to offer if his
argument is to be dialectical, rather than empirical, and if it is to rely on assumptions that are more fundamental than
mere common beliefs.

163. Realism About Perceptible Qualities
Aristotle accepts a realist view of perception, since he claims that the perceiver absorbs the form of some quality that
the object has whether or not it is being perceived. The teleological aspects of his theory equally require realism;
absorption of the form of the object allows the perceiver

312

CHAPTER 14 § 163

to act in the way appropriate to how the object really is. Aristotle assumes that the colours, sounds, etc. of external
bodies exist in the bodies before they are perceived.24 He wants to know what features of the world perceivers detect
when they respond appropriately to their circumstances.25 The different senses correspond to the different useful
properties that an animal can detect (434b9–435a10).
Aristotle's realist and teleological assumptions help to explain an initially puzzling claim. He argues that when I
perceive an object, the actuality of the object is one and the same with the actuality of the perceiver, and that it is in the
perceiver, not in the object (425b26–426a6; cf. PN 439a13–16). More generally, he claims that the actuality of a change
is in the patient rather than the agent (Phys. 202a13, 224b4, 25–6, GA 742a30–2, Met. 1050a29). The relevant sort of
change is essentially doing something to a patient, not simply doing something. When the builder builds a house, it is
primarily something done to the bricks and mortar, and only secondarily a series of movements by the builder; the
primary beneﬁciary of the change is the patient, not the agent.
The explanatory asymmetry that often concerns Aristotle helps to elucidate his point here. What the builder does
counts as a case of (successfully) building because something happens to the bricks; it is not because he makes these
movements that the change happening to the house counts as its being built. Ann's acting on Bert counts as
(successfully) teaching Bert because Bert actually learns something, not the other way round. If the bricks and the pupil
are recalcitrant, the agents might do the very same thing (understood one way), but what they did would not count as
successful building or teaching; it is the difference in the patient that makes the difference between failure and success
at building and teaching.26 Aristotle appeals to the same teleological assumptions that guide his claims about
potentiality.27
The same argument ought to show why the actuality of the perceiver and of the object are in the perceiver. Though we
speak of the object ‘being perceived’, suggesting that it is a patient, the passive verb is misleading, since it is really the
object that affects the perceiver. My perceiving the rock is my being affected by the rock; being perceived is not a
change in the rock or something that the rock does to exercise one of its proximate potentialities.28 I have a potentiality
to perceive objects, but objects do not have potentialities of the same sort to be perceived by me. The event counts as
its being perceived because of the change in me, not the other way round. The object does not become suitable to have
its form absorbed when I perceive it; it was suitable all along, and its being perceived by me is no real change in it.
When I perceive it, therefore, I must become aware of it as it has been before I perceived it. Aristotle still implies a
realist view of the objects of perception.

CHAPTER 14 § 164

313

164. The Rejection of Realism
So far, then, Aristotle is justiﬁed in saying that my perceiving a red object is primarily an event in me, not in the object.
But he assumes further that the relevant actuality of the object is its becoming red, and so he concludes that its
becoming red consists in its being perceived as red.29 This conclusion conﬂicts with the formulae of perception. For F2
says that the perceiver is potentially what the object is actually, and that in perception the perceiver becomes actually
what the object has been actually all along. Similarly, F3 says that the perceiver acquires the form that the object had all
along. But Aristotle's conclusion implies that the object is only potentially red before it is perceived. The formulae of
perception assume the objective existence of real perceptible qualities independent of the perceiver; but Aristotle's
conclusion makes their existence depend on their being perceived.
Aristotle is entitled to claim that the perceived object has an actuality corresponding to the state of the perceiver as
teaching corresponds to learning—the same event viewed from the other side. This event is the object's being
perceived as red; and it no more implies that the object becomes actually red than the identity of the teaching and the
learning implies that the teacher learns when the learner learns.30
Aristotle sees that his conclusion seems to threaten realism, and he distinguishes himself from subjectivists and
relativists, who make the sensible properties of external things depend on how they appear to perceivers. He argues
that his opponents are right about actual perceptible qualities, which do indeed depend on perceivers, but not about
potential qualities, which are independent of perceivers (426a20–6).31
This reply, however, does not defend very much of the realist position. Aristotle's opponents could fairly easily agree
that there are external subjects causing our perceptions, but they need not concede that our perceptions reveal to us
any truths about the nature of the external subjects. The fact that two objects are capable of appearing white to us, and
hence of becoming white, does not show that the two subjects have some property in common, or that they appear to
us as they really are. If only the potentiality is allowed to exist unperceived, it is not clear how Aristotle can distinguish
sensory qualities such as colours from qualities such as painfulness; we know that objects causing us pain are capable
of causing pain, and that they are therefore painful; but it does not follow that this causal tendency of theirs
corresponds to any further common property, and that is why we do not think painfulness itself is a real quality of
objects in the way we think colours are.

314

CHAPTER 14 § 165

If Aristotle's claim about the real existence of potentially coloured objects amounts only to a weak claim about causal
tendencies, it seems to raise grave doubts about how perception can yield any knowledge of external objects. His views
would be both more consistent and more plausible if he had not added these aberrant remarks.

165. The Infallibility of the Senses
Still, this view about actual sensory qualities is not merely aberrant; for Aristotle's defence of the reliability of the senses
shows why he might incline to such a view. He defends the surprisingly strong claim that each sense is infallible about
its special objects (427b8–16), apparently because he accepts the sceptical claim that if we can justiﬁably distrust one of
our sensory judgments we can distrust them all.32 If, for instance, green light shines on a red wall, and I mistakenly see
the wall as brown, Aristotle might say that this is not a mistake by sight, but a mistaken inference from correct
information given by sight. If he is right, I must be seeing something that is really brown, but still different from the
wall and its real colour; it must be a purely phenomenal colour.33 From this view of special sense-objects, Aristotle can
defend the infallibility of the special senses against the more obvious grounds of objection, and therefore he can
defend the veridical character of the senses against sceptical objections.34
But this anti-sceptical argument is perfectly useless for Aristotle's purposes. He seeks to show that the senses are
veridical about external qualities, but his argument abandons realism in its attempt to defeat scepticism.35 If this is the
only viable anti-sceptical strategy, then ﬁrst philosophy is incoherent. For it offers to answer scepticism about the
senses (in Metaphysics iv); it defends the general hylomorphic account of substance that is supposed to support a
hylomorphic account of the soul; this account of the soul requires perceptual realism, and therefore needs an answer to
scepticism; but the answer to scepticism rejects perceptual realism.
The incoherence, however, is present in Aristotle's interpretation of his views, not in the views themselves. For
Metaphysics iv defends perceptual realism against the sceptic, without requiring the senses to be infallible, and therefore
without accepting the anti-realist view that is needed to defend infallibility. Only Aristotle's assumptions about
infallibility make ﬁrst philosophy incoherent; and if he rejects these assumptions, he does not undermine the rest of
ﬁrst philosophy.
The faults in Aristotle's anti-sceptical strategy reﬂect a more general fault in his views about methods of inquiry.36 His
account of empirical

CHAPTER 14 § 166

315

method reﬂects a rather naïve empiricism, an uncritical conﬁdence in the veridical character of the senses; it does not
occur to him that the sensory ‘appearances’ used in the construction of a theory may themselves be the product of
theory and interpretation. He has a special reason for resisting such a thought to the extent that he sometimes holds a
foundationalist view of justiﬁcation; if we must justify a perceptual claim by appeal to some further principle, and we
can raise questions about the reliability of that principle, we might seem to face a vicious regress. These views together
make it intelligible for Aristotle to claim that some perceptual judgments provide an infallible basis for other justiﬁed
judgments. The infallible basis described in the De Anima is useless, however, for his purposes.
The anomaly in Aristotle's claims about perception deserves attention, therefore, because it reveals the inﬂuence of his
naïve empiricism and foundationalism. We have previously insisted that these assumptions, prominent as they are in
some of his claims about inquiry and knowledge, really conﬂict with his most fundamental views. Dialectical method
requires us to treat coherence as a source of justiﬁcation, and to begin from data that we recognize as subject to
revision. First philosophy attempts to strengthen dialectic; but we will not take its attempts seriously unless we reject
foundationalism. The anomalous claims about perception rest on prominent Aristotelian assumptions; but these
assumptions conﬂict with the most plausible and fundamental principles of ﬁrst philosophy. We can therefore see not
only that his claim about perception are anomalous, but also explain why they are anomalous, and why Aristotle, in the
light of a proper understanding of his own views, should reject them.

166. Complex Perception
Aristotle's teleological account of perception requires the absorption of the form of the perceptible object. This seems
to involve simply a state of the perceiver's faculty and organ of perception; but in fact it must require more. For we will
have no reason to suppose that the perceiver really absorbs the immaterial form unless we have reason to believe that
the representative features of its perceptual state help to explain its other psychic states and behaviour. Hence the
account must include some description of the process leading from the absorption of the form to action. The
intervening stages require reference to how perceivers take the perception, or how the perception appears to them; and
in this process ‘appearance’ (phantasia) and inference will be important.
In some cases Aristotle realizes this. In ‘coincidental’ perception we

316

CHAPTER 14 § 166

might say, for example, ‘I see that he is a diabetic’. In such cases we see something that we take to indicate the level of
blood sugar, and with further thought have taken this to indicate diabetes. ‘See that . . . ’ is to be analysed into what we
really see plus inferences to what we believe.37 We can allow the senses to have a fairly limited and ﬁxed range of objects
if we add the appropriate inferences.
Aristotle does not offer this explanation, however, in every case where it might seem suitable. He attributes to a sense
some functions that we might ascribe to inference from perception. The common sense has its objects, including size,
shape, and number, that are all perceived by motion (425a14–20). These are related to, though not the same as, the
properties that Plato calls ‘common’ because they are grasped by the soul itself, not by the senses (Tht. 185b7–9).
Aristotle resists Plato's argument that because these are not the objects of any of the normal ﬁve senses they must be
grasped by inference from the senses, not by the senses themselves.
The Platonic view makes the common sensibles coincidental objects of sense, and Aristotle rejects this view of them
(425a24–7), arguing instead for a uniﬁed faculty of perception. He uses the same device to explain how one sense can
coincidentally grasp the special object of another, so that we say we perceive by sight that something is sweet. He uses
it again to explain second-order perception; on his view, we can properly say that we perceive by sight that we are
seeing, and need not attribute this awareness to some non-sensory psychic faculty.
In all these cases Aristotle must assume a role for appearance that he does not explicitly recognize. Awareness of
motion, the basic common sensible, requires awareness that something is different from the way it was; but this
awareness requires awareness of time, which requires memory, to remember the earlier moment when we perceive the
later; and memory requires appearance, since our perception of the earlier moment must somehow be represented in
our later awareness. The common sense, therefore, requires appearance. If so, the common sensibles seem to be
coincidental sensibles parallel to the son of Cleon; in one case as in the other the additional information comes from
memory, appearance, and inference.38
A parallel objection faces Aristotle's attempt to distinguish coincidental perception by one sense of the object of
another sense (e.g. the perception of sweetness by sight) from the coincidental perception of the son of Cleon
(425a21–7). In his view the second case is not really a case of seeing at all, since it is not the faculty of sight that
informs us that this is the son of Cleon. But in the ﬁrst case as well as the second we need memory and appearance;
for we must notice that this white thing has in the past been associated with a sweet taste, and infer that it will be

CHAPTER 14 § 166

317

associated with such a taste this time as well. If so, appearance and inference seem to have no less role in this
perception than in the perception of the son of Cleon. In both cases we see a colour and infer, by memory and
appearance, some further property of the object. Aristotle seems to exaggerate the role of the senses, and to
underestimate the role of appearance.39
He seems to do the same in his account of second-order perception, the awareness that we see or hear. He suggests
that second-order awareness is a function of the same sense that has ﬁrst-order awareness; sight, for instance, makes
us aware of our seeing.40 He adds that such second-order awareness requires a uniﬁed sense-faculty (426b24–427a14),
since our awareness of seeing requires awareness of the difference from hearing and other types of perception. This
argument shows that the common sense is also needed; for the uniﬁed sense requires awareness of unity, number,
sameness, and difference, and this awareness belongs to the common sense (426b12–24). But for the reasons we have
already considered, Aristotle cannot go this far without appeal to memory, since that is needed for awareness of time
and movement, of the difference between this sweet thing and that earlier loud thing, and of this perception following
that one; and memory requires appearance, not merely perception. Aristotle assigns to perception a function that
seems to belong properly to appearance.
Aristotle's exaggeration of the role of the senses perhaps reﬂects his rather over-simpliﬁed view of the accuracy of
perception. The more we think of perception simply as a transaction between the senses and the external world, the
easier it may seem to insist that we perceive what is really there by absorbing features that are already there. Hence, if
we can show that some property is absorbed by the senses, we have all the better reason for insisting that it really
exists; and this may be part of Aristotle's reason for treating common sensibles as objects of sense.
His rather naïve attitude to observation and induction shows why this view of the senses might appeal to him, and how
it might support some of his other views. To the extent that we allow appearance and memory to affect perception, we
may seem to increase the role of construction and reduce the role of detection and discovery. Aristotle's formulae of
perception show that he wants to avoid conceding too much to construction; and this motive explains why he tries to
make perception as self-sufﬁcient as possible.
If this is Aristotle's strategy, however, it is mistaken; and Aristotle himself cannot afford to accept it too far, since he
combines realist claims about perception with a teleological conception that must appeal to appearance and memory. If
perception is to play the appropriate role in explaining the creature's behaviour, the creature must interpret its

318

CHAPTER 14 § 167

perceptions, remember them selectively, associate them, and link them with desire. Aristotle has no reason not to
appeal to these same psychic functions to explain the types of complex perception that he ascribes to the senses alone.
His teleological view of perception is not responsible for his over-simple claims about perception. On the contrary, the
source of these claims is the foundationalist epistemological outlook that conﬂicts with the conception of strong
dialectic underlying the teleological account of the soul.

167. Appearance
If we simply believe that a dog has seen a red object, we cannot infer much about what it will do. We can explain much
more if we add facts about how the object appears to the dog. If it looks green, then our expectations about the dog's
actions will be different.41 Appeal to appearance makes actions seem explicable that might otherwise have seemed
inexplicable.
But if we suppose that something appears red to a dog, we still may have no expectations about action, since it may not
respond in any uniform way to the same appearance. Aristotle suggests that the further state to be assumed is some
form of desire. But assumption of a desire affects our view of the appearance, since any plausible desire will usually be
selective (an animal is unlikely to want to get everything of the same apparent colour). Aristotle believes animals desire
something as pleasant, and hence that its appearance as pleasant helps to explain the action. But this appearance is
consistent with inaction if we see no possible action to attain the pleasure; and so the appearance of an action as a
possible means must be assumed. We must, then, refer to all these types of appearance, if we are to extend teleological
explanation as far as is reasonable.
These different roles for appearance are hard to understand unless we take them to involve some sort of inference. We
need to understand the process of transition from one state to another, e.g. from perception to appearance or from
appearance to desire. We could try to understand them in purely material terms; but if we seek a teleological
explanation and describe them as mental states, we will look for relations between the content of the different states.
When we see a dog confronted by water and trying to drink it, we understand his behaviour if we assume that he sees
the colour of the water, remembers that this is the same colour as the water that has previously satisﬁed his thirst, and
so infers that this water is desirable; he notices that there is nothing to stop him getting the water, and so infers that it is
worth his while to try to get it.

CHAPTER 14 § 168

319

If we think his mental states have their contents related in these ways, we have some conception of the laws observed
in the transition from one state to another.
This result shows that a hylomorphic account of perception must include more than perception and behaviour. If we
are to ﬁnd the right links between them we must also ascribe to the subjects the further states of appearance and
desire; and we cannot explain the regular transitions between these states without attributing inference to the subject.
Creatures with perception need appearance, desire, and inference, if we are to be able to attribute these states to them
in a teleological account of psychic states.

168. Appearance and Thought
At this point, however, we face a difﬁculty in reconciling the demands of the teleological account with some of
Aristotle's explicit claims and with a plausible view of the facts. When we see the general form of a teleological
explanation involving perception and appearance, we readily suppose that it will include inference; and once we
mention inference we readily mention belief—we are inclined to say that because the dog believes the water is available,
and wants the water, it tries to get it. This account of its mental states, however, seems to conﬂict with Aristotle's claim
that non-rational animals have appearance without belief.
But belief implies conviction (pistis) (for it is impossible to have a belief without conviction in what one believes);
but no beasts have conviction, whereas many have appearances. Further, every belief implies conviction, and
conviction implies being persuaded, and persuasion implies reason; but some beasts have appearance, whereas none
has reason. (428a19–24)42
Since they lack reason and belief, they will be unable to reason from one belief to another, and therefore will lack the
capacity for inference. If a teleological account of their psychic states requires us to ascribe to them states they cannot
have, it leads us astray.
It will prove helpful to raise a further difﬁculty at this stage. Aristotle attributes truth and falsity both to perceptions
and to appearances, and a teleological account cannot easily avoid this. On the other hand he seems to imply that
perception and appearance cannot be true or false. For he insists that no linguistic item is true or false unless it is a
sentence making an assertion—mere single words or sequences do not constitute anything true or false (De Int.
16a9–18); and in the same way combinations of mental states do not add up to anything true or false

320

CHAPTER 14 § 169

unless they are the sort of combination that makes an assertion (432a10–12). The appropriate combination makes a
belief; and simply having mental states that can be components of a belief or assertion is not believing or asserting.
Since non-rational animals lack beliefs, their mental states cannot be the bearers of truth and falsity.
We must clarify three different contrasts that Aristotle draws between the states of rational and of non-rational
subjects:
1. Mere perception and appearance are not sufﬁcient for thought.
2. A mere collection of thoughts does not make the combination that is necessary for belief and assertion. The
four thoughts ‘to runs man bank’ do not make any further thought with further content of its own. We have to
combine them in the right way, into ‘the man runs to the bank’ before we have the sort of thing that can be true
or false.
3. The right sort of combination yields something that is capable of truth or falsity; but it is not enough for
assertion or belief, an actual bearer of truth. Though Aristotle lacks a special term for the entertaining of a
proposition, he needs to distinguish it from belief and supposition (hupolêpsis, 427b16–26).43
Aristotle therefore needs to distinguish appearance from thought, thought from entertaining a proposition, and
entertaining from asserting.

169. Thought
The ﬁrst distinction to be understood contrasts appearances with thoughts (noêmata), apart from any appeal to
combination. Aristotle sees that if combination is left out of account some types of thoughts are hard to distinguish
from appearances (432a12–14). Still, he tries to draw a distinction; and in fact he draws several distinctions that do not
seem obviously connected:
1. Animals lack any grasp of a universal, and have only appearances and memory of particulars (EN 1147b4–5).
2. Thought requires us to grasp essences—what ﬂesh is, as opposed to ﬂesh (429b10–18).
3. Intellect is not affected by matter in thinking in the way that perception is affected in perceiving (429a31–2).
The most surprising of these claims is the ﬁrst. It seems odd to deny that in perception we are aware of universals,
since we are aware of things as red or hard. Moreover, memory, repetition, association, and appearance make us aware
of mental contents apart from what is presented to us at the moment; why do they not make us aware of

CHAPTER 14 § 169

321

universals? The dog that sees the water seems to be aware of it not only as silvery but also as pleasant; and it seems
hard to deny that the universal pleasantness is part of the content of the dog's appearance.
Aristotle should claim that an animal's appearances may be explained by their relation to some universal even though
the animal itself does not grasp the universal as such. Perhaps grasp of a universal as such requires the capacity to
regard different features of an object as giving reasons for attributing the universal to it. If, for instance, I have the
concept of a golf ball, I have some beliefs about the shape, size, and behaviour that give grounds and reasons for
calling something a golf ball. I need not deploy all these beliefs in an explicit inference whenever I use the term; but if I
were incapable of them, and could still pick out golf balls, I would be picking them out by something other than my
grasp of the concept and my knowledge of the universal. If one perceiver grasps a universal and the other does not,
both may pick out instances of the same universal. But the ‘mere’ perceiver will not give the right account of relevant
features; it may confuse the relevant features with irrelevant but constantly associated features.
Aristotle assumes these conditions for grasp of a universal. In his view, the universal is present in the subject only after
the operations of sense, memory, and experience (APo 100a3–9, Met. 981a5–7). He agrees that in one sense perception
is of the universal (APo 100a16–b1; cf. Phys. 184a23–6); but he does not agree that the universal is present in the
subject until more demanding conditions are met. He must, therefore, distinguish the awareness that merely
corresponds to a universal from the awareness that includes some grasp of the universal as such; the second sort of
awareness is conﬁned to subjects that can recognize some feature of their experience as a ground for attributing the
universal to a particular they experience.
This ﬁrst feature of thought leads naturally to the second, the claim that thought grasps essences and not just their
instances. Subjects who are aware of ‘being ﬂesh’ use a conception of what ﬂesh is in their judgment that this is ﬂesh;
subjects who are simply aware of ﬂesh need not recognize ﬂesh as such, and therefore need not use any conception of
what ﬂesh is. If I recognize ﬂesh as such, I need not know the account of the real essence of ﬂesh; but I need some
roughly correct conception of what it is. Aristotle reasonably supposes that subjects applying a concept of F to their
experience are aware of grounds for calling something F; and this is why thought must grasp what it is to be ﬂesh.
The third feature of thought now becomes intelligible from the ﬁrst two. Aristotle insists that the intellect is unaffected
by material objects, in some way that distinguishes it from the senses. The senses themselves are not affected by matter
in a straightforward way, since they absorb

322

CHAPTER 14 § 170

the sensible form without the matter. But they are affected by matter in a way the intellect is not, in so far as they are
essentially related to essentially material spatio-temporal particulars. Perceiving is essentially perceiving some particular
that has causally affected us because it is the sort of material object it is. By contrast, the causal interaction required for
grasp of the universal F is just perceptual interaction with instances of F; for there are no universals separable from
particulars and we must be aware of particulars through perception (432a3–10).44 The non-perceptual aspects of our
grasp of universals consist in thought about the particular object in relation to others of the same sort, not in any
further causal interaction with the object.45

170. Thought and Inference
The three features of thought that we have considered help to explain the difference between mental states involving
thought and those that lack it. In asserting that belief and assertion require the combination of thoughts and
appearance does not (432a10–12), Aristotle does not distinguish them accurately. Merely entertaining a proposition
already requires some combination of thoughts, and something more is needed for assertion and belief. Moreover,
those appearances that depend on memory seem to involve some combination resulting from the perceptions that
form them; and if this is not combination of thoughts, Aristotle needs to say why not.
To entertain a proposition is to grasp its logical structure; to grasp the sense of ‘p and q’ is to understand that if it is
true it makes p true and also makes q true. In grasping the logical syntax and structure of the proposition, we grasp the
inferences it requires or permits. To entertain the proposition that dogs are animals is to grasp two concepts, associated
with different sets of inferences, and to combine the inferences into new possible inferences. We have no reason to
attribute this sort of inferential combination to non-rational perceivers.
This type of combination also distinguishes assertion and belief from appearance. Aristotle claims that belief involves
conviction and persuasion, which involve reasoning and are not present in non-rational perceivers (428a19–24).
Subjects capable of conviction and persuasion can consider evidence and reasons, and ‘make up their minds’ by
reaching a conclusion from them. To reach a belief is to realize one of the possibilities that we take to be open when we
entertain the proposition that we come to believe. These conditions for belief and assertion justify Aristotle's claim that
non-rational perceivers cannot have it.

CHAPTER 14 § 171

323

Aristotle denies grasp of universals as such to non-rational perceivers, because grasp of universals involves the capacity
to recognize features of objects as reasons for applying a concept to them. But this capacity to recognize reasons
cannot be separated from the capacities exercised in combination of thoughts and in belief and assertion. Though it is
convenient to distinguish the grasp of a single concept or universal, e.g. the property of being a dog, from combination
of this thought with others, and from beliefs about dogs, this distinction should not mislead us into thinking that the
grasp of a single concept can precede the capacity to combine and to believe.46
Aristotle does not explain the relation between his different conditions for thought in contrast to perception. But they
turn out to be closely connected; each of them explains the others, and is satisﬁed only if the others are satisﬁed. The
central capacity presupposed by all these is the capacity to recognize and make inferences on the basis of reasons; for it
explains the different features he ascribes to thought, and the ways it differs from appearance. Aristotle must
distinguish the ‘synthesis of reproduction in imagination’ from the ‘synthesis of recognition in a concept’.47 He does not
tell us exactly how to mark this distinction but his conditions tell us enough to show how he ought to mark it.

171. Thought, Content, and Structure
Now that we have seen how Aristotle distinguishes thought, belief, and inference from mere appearance, we should
return to the question that we raised previously about the role of appearance in the teleological account of a perceiver's
psychic states. Aristotle might easily seem to assume that a non-rational perceiver has true and false beliefs and
inferences from one belief to another; but his account of thought and appearance assures us that he is not entitled to
assume this. We now want to see if we can understand his claims about appearance without forcing him into severe
inconsistency.
We may be sceptical about ascribing any deﬁnite appearance to a non-rational perceiver at all. If a dog sees a bone, how
does the bone appear to it? Does the dog regard it as a bone, or a bone in the corner, or as a long white thing, or as
food? If a creature has the relevant thoughts and concepts of bone, white, food, and so on, it is reasonable to ask
which way its experience appears to it; but a creature without thoughts apparently cannot ﬁnd that its experience
appears any of these ways.48 Still, we can hardly explain how its perception is related to desire and action, unless we
assume an appearance with some content described in conceptual and propositional terms.

324

CHAPTER 14 § 171

If, for instance, the dog sees the white thing, it may be deceived into regarding the object as red, and may react to it as
it would to a red object. (Suppose, e.g., the dog's food has always been red, it is hungry, a red light is shining on the
white object, and the dog tries to eat it.) To explain its action we naturally say that the white thing appears red to it, and
we assume the propositional content ‘that's red’. But we cannot assume a mental state that includes the thought of
something's being red, and we cannot assume a belief, since the dog has neither thoughts nor beliefs. To grasp a
thought and entertain a proposition, we must have some grasp of the logical structure of the thought and of the
inferential possibilities it involves. If a creature is not aware of any of the grounds for belief and inference that belong
to the structure of a thought, we ought not to ascribe the thought to it.
A propositional description may capture the character of a non-rational creature's mental states. For even a rational
subject may not grasp all the logical structure and inferential possibilities of a thought; and in that case the
propositional description will provide a less exact description of his mental state, but it will still capture the state's role
in the transition from one mental state to another. If I grasp the inferential function of ‘and’ so poorly that I accept (p
& q), but do not accept p and q if I am asked about them separately, then the attribution to me of a belief in a
conjunction may be misleading (if an observer expects me to accept the conjuncts separately); but still my belief that
there is bread and butter on the table may explain my going to the table in circumstances where I would not have gone
for either without the other. A partial grasp of the proposition explains the beliefs I hold.
Non-rational subjects will not literally grasp any of the grounds for inferring one proposition from another, but
something like a partial grasp may explain their other mental states and their behaviour. If a dog seeing a piece of meat
has the appearance ‘that it's red’, the dog need not have the appearance with the structure ‘that it's red’; the
propositional description may describe the role of the appearance in the transition from the dog's causal interactions
with the red object to its attempts to eat the object. We claim only that the dog has the mental state that plays a role
similar to the role of the belief that this is red. Though the dog has no concepts at all, in the way a rational subject has
them, some are more appropriate than others for describing its appearances. If a dog bites a stranger who is the Prime
Minister, the stranger does not appear to the dog to be the Prime Minister but she might appear to the dog to be
unfamiliar or unwelcome, since that description might indicate the role of the dog's state in explaining its actions.
This account of non-rational appearances relies on Aristotle's own explanation of abstraction. In abstraction, we treat a
triangle as though it

CHAPTER 14 § 172

325

existed without the physical object that it is actually embodied in; but no falsity results, since we rely neither on the
claim that a triangle can exist separately nor on the features that this particular material triangle happens to have (Phys.
193b31–5, Met. 1078a14–21).49 Similarly, in describing non-rational mental states we may seem to attribute too much
content, because we identify the state in terms that imply more content than it really has; but we restrict ourselves to
explanatory roles warranted by the content we ascribe. We can therefore claim on Aristotle's behalf (though he does
not claim this for himself) that his defence of abstraction supports his use of propositional descriptions for the content
of appearances.
This account of the content of appearances also explains why Aristotle takes perceptions and appearances to allow
truth and falsehood, even though he takes these to be properties of assertions (428a11–12, a16–19, b17–30).50 Since
true and false propositions describe the content of perceptions and appearances, these mental states may themselves
be called true or false; but they need not have the structure that properly belongs only to assertions and beliefs.

172. The Cognitive Faculties
Aristotle regards perception, appearance, and thought as ‘discriminative’ (kritikon) faculties, allowing us to distinguish
one type of external object from another, so that we can react in different and appropriate ways. We have tried to see
the implications of Aristotle's hylomorphic theory for his claims about the cognitive faculties. Sometimes the general
theory helps to explain and vindicate different aspects of Aristotle's view; but sometimes it requires us to reject some
of his claims, or to alter his emphasis.
At ﬁrst sight the three cognitive states seem clearly separable. We take perception to cover seeing, hearing, and so on,
appearance to be a further mental state added to perception, and thought to be a third level added to the ﬁrst two. But
on closer inspection the divisions are less clear. If perception is a cognitive state, including some awareness of features
of the external world, then it cannot do without appearance. To have perceptual knowledge I must not only perceive
something that is actually red, but must also perceive that it is red; my perception cannot be combined with other states
to explain my behaviour unless some propositional content is ascribed to it. If it has a propositional content, it appears
to me in some way, and so requires appearance.
Rational perceivers have perceptual appearances involving a further level of complexity; for how the object appears to
them is determined

326

CHAPTER 14 § 172

by their concepts. The perceptual appearance that leads to action often includes a belief; and a belief results from
acceptance of a proposition on the basis of evidence and reasons. The Stoics construe perception as the product of a
perceptual affection (pathos), appearance, and rational assent (sunkatathesis).51 Analysis of Aristotle's account shows that
he is committed to the same view; though he seems to conﬁne perception to the ﬁrst stage of the process, he cannot
do this if he is to attribute truth and falsity to perception.
Aristotle does not actually deny any of these points about the connexion of perception with appearance and thought.
But he does not seem to see their importance, since he does not describe the role of judgments in concepts or of
concepts in perception. Questions about the conceptual apparatus required for genuinely cognitive perception concern
Kant; but they also concern Plato, in his discussion of the ‘common properties’ (Tht. 184–6), and the Stoics, in their
views on the role of appearance and thought in perception. Aristotle, however, is silent on these questions.
His general theory does not lead us to expect these silences. Quite the contrary; his hylomorphic, teleological view of
the soul requires him to attend to the connexions between perception and other psychic states. His doctrine of the soul
rests on his general metaphysical theory of form and matter; and if he had attended more closely to the implications of
that theory, his account of the particular psychic faculties would have been closer to the Stoic account.
Aristotle is inﬂuenced, however, by the naïve realism that also affects his treatment of perception as a source of
evidence for a theory. He suggests that perception, without interpretation or further inference, is in itself a reliable
foundation for claims to knowledge; and he suggests this partly because of foundationalist assumptions about
justiﬁcation. These views lead him to claim that perception is infallible; and since appearance is not infallible, he treats
perception as a cognitive state separable from appearance.
Here he is misled; for his own theory explains why perception cannot be a cognitive state contributing to the
teleological explanation of action unless it includes the propositional content that requires appearance. Aristotle is
mistaken in thinking that the appropriate role for perception in knowledge and justiﬁcation requires it to be noninferential and infallible; indeed, his attempts to secure infallibility lead him to deny realism about perception. If he
faces the implications of his general teleological theory, he must abandon his over-simpliﬁed view of the role of
perception in knowledge. We have seen that he ought to abandon this view anyhow, since it prevents a proper
understanding of the role of dialectic in inquiry and justiﬁcation. The account of the soul depends on

CHAPTER 14 § 172

327

ﬁrst philosophy, which itself implies a role for dialectic that conﬂicts with Aristotle's over-simpliﬁed views about
perception.
Aristotle's over-simpliﬁcations support an unavailing defence of realism and objectivism. If we agree that our
informative perceptions reﬂect our appearances and concepts, we may infer that we perceive things only as they appear
to us, not as they really are; and then we seem to agree with Protagoras. Aristotle's solution is his appeal to a level of
perception that precedes the distorting effects of appearance; but this solution assumes an implausible account of
perception that Aristotle himself cannot maintain.
These defects in Aristotle's views on perception explain three more general defects in his method:
1. Aristotle tends to distinguish perceptual appearances from the broader class of common beliefs, and to regard
the perceptual appearances as more reliable. His division is intelligible if he regards basic perceptions as a means
of direct access to reality.
2. Hence, when he thinks we can perceive something directly, e.g. the presence of teleological sequences, he thinks
this perception reﬂects no interpretation and needs no defence.
3. In appealing to those appearances that are common beliefs less directly derived from appearance Aristotle is
more reluctant to claim truth for the premisses or conclusions of his arguments. Hence he is reserved about the
claims of dialectical arguments to discover the truth.52
Aristotle's views on perception, then, encourage over-hasty conﬁdence in ‘genuine’ perceptual appearances, and overhasty suspicion of dialectical argument from non-perceptual appearances. In the Metaphysics, on the other hand, he is
more willing both to defend perceptual appearances as though they needed defence and to claim truth for the
premisses and conclusions of some dialectical arguments. Both sides of him are reﬂected in the treatment of the
cognitive faculties in the DA. The over-simple view is reﬂected in the division of the faculties. More complex views are
reﬂected in the description of the faculties, showing that they are less separable than Aristotle might lead us to believe.
We should not be surprised, then, to ﬁnd a conﬂict between the demands of Aristotle's hylomorphic theory and some
of his particular claims about the cognitive faculties. For some of Aristotle's basic metaphysical claims depend on the
rejection of the sort of naïve realism that affects some of his epistemological claims. The explanatory role of perception
makes it clear that informative perception must involve appearance, since that is the link between perception and
desire. The faults in Aristotle's views on perception should help us to notice some

328

CHAPTER 14 § 172

broader faults in his views about method; but they should not turn us against the method of the DA, which actually
shows us how to correct some of his errors.
If, then, we attend to the connexion between the theory of the soul and ﬁrst philosophy, we can see why Aristotle is
committed to views that are more plausible than those he actually presents. Our attention to the metaphysical
background of his philosophy of mind shows us how to make a reasonable choice on Aristotle's behalf between
conﬂicting elements in his views about psychic faculties; he has good independent reasons to abandon the assumptions
underlying one side of the conﬂict.

15 Action
173. Desire and Perception
Since Aristotle's account of the cognitive faculties belongs to a teleological account of the soul, he ought to show how
perception and appearance help to explain behaviour. By themselves they are not enough to explain it; we need to add
some further state to explain how the selective awareness present in the cognitive faculties affects the creature's good.
This further state is the one that initiates movement; Aristotle remarks that the soul in animals is deﬁned by two
faculties, the discriminative, belonging to sense and thought, and the faculty of initiating movement (DA 432a15–17).1
In looking for this part that initiates movement (432b7–8) Aristotle insists strongly on two claims; ﬁrst, this part is not
separable from the other parts and faculties of the soul; and second, it is one part, the desiring (orektikon) part, and not
several different parts sharing this role. Both of these claims express the role of desire in the teleological account of the
soul.
Aristotle argues that the desiring part is not separable, because it is closely connected to perception; it is a faculty of the
perceptive soul, not marking out another type of soul.2
Perceiving is like simply saying and thinking. But whenever 〈something is〉 pleasant or painful, after having, so to
speak, afﬁrmed or denied, 〈the animal〉 pursues or avoids; and having pleasure or pain is actualizing with the
perceptive mean in relation to the good or bad as such. And avoidance and desire in actuality are the same thing,
and the desiring and the avoiding part are not different, either from each other or from the perceptive part, but
their being is other. (431a8–14)
Finding something pleasant is simply perceiving it in a certain way, and ﬁnding it pleasant is sufﬁcient for desiring it.
When Aristotle says that the psychic parts are the same but their being is different, he perhaps means that for an
animal no further mental process or capacity is required for action once it has recognized an object as pleasant and
seen that this is the way to get it. A particular capacity, as the perceptive part, absorbs features of the external object; as
the desiring part, it originates movement. We ascribe two roles to the same capacity.

330

CHAPTER 15 § 174

We know what perceptions we should ascribe to a creature when we also know what appearances and desires are
reasonably ascribed to it. Equally, we have no reason to attribute a particular desire to a creature unless we suppose it is
capable of acting on the desire in particular circumstances; and we have no ground for attributing one desire rather
than another in particular circumstances unless we also assume something about the creature's perceptions. If we see a
dog moving towards water, we can reasonably assume that it wants water only if we also suppose it has an appearance
of water; if we thought that it was hallucinating and that the water appeared to it as meat, we would assume a different
desire.3 We must attribute perceptions, appearances, anticipations of pleasure and pain, and desire all at the same time,
and we lack grounds for attributing any one without the others.
Aristotle therefore refuses to treat the desiring part of the soul, or any subdivision of it, as a separable part; to think of
it this way is to conceal its essential connexions with other psychic states in a teleological explanation of behaviour. It is
reasonable for him to begin his discussion of desire by insisting on its inseparability from the other parts of the soul;
his reasons for insisting on this express his guiding assumptions about the nature of psychic states.

174. The Unity of Desire
Aristotle now refuses to attribute the origination of motion to more than one part, separable or inseparable. Instead of
recognizing two sources of motion, reason and desire, he insists that there is one mover, and that this is the desiring
part.
The mover, then, is one, the desiring part. For if the movers were two, thought and desire, they would move
according to some common form. But as it is, thought plainly does not move us without desire (for wish is desire,
and when we are moved according to reasoning we are also moved according to wish), while desire moves even
contrary to reasoning, since appetite is a 〈kind of desire〉. (433a21–6)4
If we speak of the conﬂict this way, we can maintain that there is one mover; and Aristotle assumes that whenever we
seem to have found two movers, they will move ‘according to some common form’ (433a21–2), and this common
form will be the one mover we should have been looking for.5
We might say that sometimes the thought that an action promotes my health moves me to do the action, though
sometimes it does not; it may not move me if I have a strong desire for some conﬂicting immediate

CHAPTER 15 § 174

331

pleasure, or a strong aversion to a pain involved in the action, or if I am convinced of a moral obligation to do
something else.6 But none of these countervailing motives invariably causes a different action; the conﬂicting desires
may be overridden, or I may ignore the moral obligation I recognize. When Aristotle looks for a common form, he
refuses to stop with such a list.7 He thinks he can ﬁnd the general laws explaining the particular causal claims; for he
thinks thought does not move without desire. When we are moved in accordance with reasoning, we are moved in
accordance with wish, which is a form of desire (433a23–5). Hence rational motivation is not an exception to the
general claim about the necessity of desire for action.
This claim is useful and non-trivial only if the desiring part is genuinely a single part. The perceptive part is a single
part, not because Aristotle collects a group of psychic functions with the same effects and calls them all by the same
name; rather, the three formulae of perception suggest that perception is uniﬁed by its relation to its object. Aristotle
offers a similar unifying formula for desire; for he claims that the object of desire (to orekton) is either the good or the
apparent good achievable in action.
Hence in every case the mover is the object of desire; and the object of desire is either the good or the apparent
good—not every sort of good, but the good that is achievable in action—and therefore it admits of being
otherwise. (433a27–30)
Understanding or appearance conceives the object of desire (433b11–12), and because we recognize it as something
we desire we try to get it.8
Desire is the single and uniﬁed faculty that originates goal-directed movement, because it rests on a true or false
conception of the creature's good. We have already seen why we assume such a conception in ascribing mental states to
a creature at all.9 Desire deserves to count as a single mover because it makes this crucial connexion between
perception and action in a teleological explanation.
Aristotle seems to raise a difﬁculty, however, for his own account of animal desires. If he means that objects appear as
goods to animals, he seems to ascribe to their appearances a content that he elsewhere denies. Normally he says an
animal is moved to action by the appearance that something is pleasant (431a8–11).10 He distinguishes the appetite that
animals have from the wish that only rational agents have, by saying that appetite is for the pleasant and wish is for the
good (414b2–6; cf. 432b5–7). Hence he distinguishes human beings, as the only animals that are aware of good and
bad, from those that are aware only of the pleasant and the painful (Pol. 1253a15–18).11
This issue affects Aristotle's claim about the unity of desire. For if the

332

CHAPTER 15 § 175

object of desire is either good or pleasant, desire may appear to split into two parts, rational desire seeking the good
and non-rational desire seeking the pleasant. If we say they constitute a single desiring part because they both pursue
an object of desire, we still need a better description of the object of desire than ‘good or pleasant’.

175. Desire and Apparent Good
Aristotle must answer that ‘apparent good’ need not refer to something's appearing as good, but may instead refer to
the good that appears, even if it appears as something other than good—as pleasant, for instance. The teleological
conception of psychic faculties supports this appeal to an apparent good. For if an animal is teleologically organized,
teleological principles should explain how things appear to the animal, and the fact that things appear to it at all; and so
we should see how its action on its appearances is good for it. When the animal acts to get what appears to it, the
appearance must be in general an appearance of its good—an appearance of something that is in fact good for the
animal, though not necessarily an appearance of it as good. To say that animals aim at what appears good is not to
describe the content of their mental states, since ‘good’ is not an intentional object of any of their desires. Their
appearances must be suitably connected to their good, even though any individual appearances may fail to aim at a real
good.
Desire, therefore, is a single faculty because it focuses on the object of desire that is the apparent good, whether or not
it appears as good to the subject; and this connexion with the good of the subject must belong to the subject's desires
taken as a whole, not taken individually. The connexion explains Aristotle's claim that thought does not seem to move
us to action without desire. For he believes that thought moves us when it aims at an end we desire, because then our
action will in some way be suitably related to our good, and so will be teleologically intelligible.
This claim must also apply, despite apparent difﬁculties, to rational agents. Unlike other animals, they have their own
conception of the good, not simply appearances of what is pleasant; and this conception of their good may be wrong.
It may none the less be connected with their good. Even if I have a gravely erroneous conception of my good, I may
be better off acting on this conception than on no conception at all; however bad it may be, I can at least act on
relatively systematic, conscious, and coordinated plans that would not be available to a nonrational agent.

CHAPTER 15 § 176

333

Aristotle, therefore, believes that action requires desire because desire involves the appropriate relation to the agent's
good. But it does not seem obvious that all desires belong to some conception of the agent's good. Some appetites for
pleasure not only do not belong to my conception of my good, but may even conﬂict with it and move me to act
incontinently (DA 433b5–10). Appetite conﬂicts with reason because it does not foresee the future.
To cope with these cases we must recognize two relations to the agent's good in a rational agent's desires. Rational
desires are uniﬁed by their relation to the agent's conception of his good. Non-rational desires are uniﬁed in the way
that an animal's desires are uniﬁed, because on the whole the agent beneﬁts from acting on appearances and desires. A
rational agent's desires are all related to the agent's good, but in these two different ways; and the different relations
make possible the sort of conﬂict that may result in incontinence. Hence Aristotle thinks he can concede the difference
that is implied by conﬂict without endangering the unity of desire.
The moving part is one in species; it is the desiring part, qua desiring—and ﬁrst of all the object of desire, since this
causes motion, by being thought or by appearing, without being moved; but the movers are more than one in
number. (433b10–13)
The unity of the faculty is secured by its relation to the agent's good.
Aristotle thinks he has shown that the desiring part is parallel to the faculties of nutrition, perception, thought, and
deliberation. He suggests that someone who recognizes the Platonic parts must recognize that these parts differ from
each other more than the Platonic parts differ (433a31–b4); and yet he thinks conﬂicts between desires do not threaten
the sort of unity he sees in the desiring part.

176. Reason and Desire
We might easily identify Aristotle's view with the apparently similar claims of Hume, who also believes desire is
necessary for motivation. Hume also believes that the faculty of desire is non-trivially uniﬁed; he does not deﬁne a
desire or passion as whatever moves us to action, but argues that whatever moves us to action must satisfy the
conditions that we antecedently know to be satisﬁed by desire and passion. Hume makes his claim non-trivial by
insisting that every desire ultimately depends on a passion; a passion is, among other things, a tendency to pursue a
certain type of object irrespective of any reasoning about it. This is part of what he means in calling a passion an
‘original existence’,

334

CHAPTER 15 § 177

and insisting that reason is and ought to be the slave of passion. He means to exclude the possibility that practical
reason could move us to pursue some end for which we do not have some desire that is independent of any reasoning;
and to this extent he severely restricts the scope of reasoning in motivation and action.12
Aristotle also wants to restrict the scope of reason, but not in the same way. He insists that reason moves us only when
it reasons for the sake of some end that is desired (433a22–5, EN 1139a35–b4); but he refrains from the crucial
Humean claim that the desire for this end must be a passion that is independent of reason. Unlike Hume, he can
readily agree that motives originate in reason no less than in desire; but he requires them to be appropriate parts of a
teleological explanation, and therefore to be suitably connected to the agent's good. This connexion with the agent's
good implies the connexion with desire.13 States that lack this sort of connexion are not appropriate parts of the formal
account that describes the soul. These claims about the unity of desire rest ultimately on Aristotle's teleological
conception of mental states; and to this extent the argument of the De Anima is both coherent and cumulative.
The argument is dialectical, in so far as it begins from common beliefs and tries to ﬁnd a rational revision of them. But
it displays the method of strong dialectic, as we have seen it in the Metaphysics and De Anima. Aristotle revises common
beliefs, to adjust them to the principles of his conception of the soul. He is discontented with the common beliefs as
they stand because he is sure there must be some one mover, and that it must be the desiring part, which must be nontrivially uniﬁed. He has reasons for being sure on these points; they are derived from his theory of the soul; and they
guide his modiﬁcation of common beliefs. At this point the De Anima relies on the view of the Metaphysics.14

177. Rational Desires
Aristotle denies that a rational animal is moved by something other than desire. Still, he has assumed that reason marks
out a distinct type of soul coordinate with the perceptive and nutritive soul (DA 415a7–11); and he will not have
shown this unless he can show that reason makes a difference to action. Aristotle remarks: ‘some non-rational
creatures do not even have appearance, and others live by this alone’ (415a10–11). If reason did not affect how rational
creatures live it would not mark out a distinct type of soul; it provides a distinctive type of desire that implies a
different soul.
Non-rational creatures lack beliefs and a grasp of universals, and so

CHAPTER 15 § 178

335

are conﬁned to appearances and memory of particulars, because they lack the right sorts of capacities for rational
assessment and inference.15 Aristotle must mention universals in his description of animals' appearances, and he must
agree that, in one sense, things appear to animals under universal descriptions; for he thinks things appear pleasant to
them. He denies, however, that the animal reaches the appearance on the basis of reasons, or by inference from (e.g.)
the general belief that sweet things are pleasant and the particular belief that this is sweet.16
This rational capacity, however, might make a minimal difference to action. If a rational and a non-rational creature
acted the same way, and their appearances and desires had a different structure, but the very same content, the
presence of rational beliefs would not mark a different kind of life. Aristotle needs to argue that, on the contrary, the
presence and inﬂuence of reason is pervasive and important.
The rational agent has a deliberative appearance, and deliberation has a distinctive role.
For whether he will do this or this is now a task for reasoning; and it is necessary to measure by one thing; for he
pursues the greater; so that he is capable of making one appearance out of several. (434a7–10)
Aristotle assumes that I answer the question ‘Am I to do x or y?’ by considering what is to be said for and against
them; I consider this with the aim of ﬁnding the action with more to be said for it. But if I ﬁnd that x offers more
pleasure than y and y offers a clearer head tomorrow, I still do not know whether x or y has more in its favour; I want
to know, then, that there is more of the same sort of thing to be said for x. Hence Aristotle insists that I must measure
by some one standard, so that I can ﬁnd what has more of that to be said for it. I need to be able to make one
appearance out of many; when I say that x has A, B, C to be said for it, and y has D, E, F, I must be able to decide
whether more is to be said for x or for y.17

178. The Scope of Deliberation
Deliberation plays a signiﬁcant, but still strictly limited, role in a rational agent's life if her only deliberative appearances
are those that identify the best instrumental means to the satisfaction of her desires. But if it is strictly limited to this
role, deliberation will not result in a life guided by deliberative appearance.18 If I do not modify a desire when
deliberation points out its exorbitant cost to me, in relation to my other desires, I will be grossly irrational, even though
reason has completed its

336

CHAPTER 15 § 179

instrumental task for me. If we think the task of deliberation is purely instrumental, then we will have to agree with
Hume that it is not contrary to reason to prefer the destruction of the world to the scratching of my ﬁnger; the
deliberation of Hume's rational agents informs them that this will be the cost of satisfying their desire not to have their
ﬁnger scratched, but they are quite uninﬂuenced by this information.19
Aristotle intends a larger role for deliberation, and assumes that agents guided by it will also deliberate about which of
their desires to satisfy, not simply about the means to satisfy a particular desire.
. . . desires become contrary to each other, and this results when reason and appetite are contrary, and this happens
in agents that have perception of time; for understanding urges us to resist because of what will happen, while
appetite 〈urges us on〉 because of what is present. (For what is pleasant now appears both pleasant without
qualiﬁcation and good without qualiﬁcation because of not seeing what will happen.) (433b5–10)20
A rational judgment that might conﬂict with appetite requires more than perception of time. A lion seeing a deer might
spring at the place where—as we might appropriately say—it expects the deer to be; but it still need not have a rational
desire.21 To form a rational desire we must compare the present and future beneﬁts and harms of different actions, and
reach a conclusion that will be expressed in a desire.
‘Seeing what will happen’ is not enough by itself for this sort of desire. I might be able to predict accurately the future
results of my actions without being able to direct my desire on the predicted states of affairs at all; and even if I could
form a desire that differs from the desire focused on the present object, this would not necessarily be a rational desire.
We have a rational desire only when we compare the advantages of the two courses of action. Perhaps our end is F and
we ﬁnd the only means to F is G; but if we consider the relation of F and G to our more ultimate end H, we may ﬁnd
that we promote H better if we avoid G and hence lose F than if we get F at the price of doing G. As long as
deliberation does not require us to focus on just one limited end at a time, we can consider the value of achieving one
end against our other ends.

179. Rational Agency and the Good
Aristotle connects rational agency with awareness of the good; but not just every conception of one's good implies
rational agency. To conceive my good, as opposed to my pleasure, I have to be able to

CHAPTER 15 § 179

337

deliberate, and to compare the results of different actions; and I will reach a view about what is best to do as a result of
the comparison of present and future that we have described. If I want A, B, and C, and deliberation shows me that x
will get me A and B without C, and y will get me C without A and B, it does not follow that I will want to do x rather
than y; clearly that depends on how much I want C compared to A and B. Rational deliberation will consider x and y
with reference to the strength of my desire for A, B, and C. If I register the strength of desire for A as 5, for B, as 4,
and for C as 7, then I will discover that I satisfy my desire more by doing x than by doing y. I measure by one standard
and pursue what seems greater.
In such cases I still limit the extent of rational deliberation about my actions. I assume the initial strength of my desires,
and conﬁne myself to ﬁnding the action that gets me what I most want. I do not criticize or modify the relative
strength of my desires, and I recognize no alternative standard of comparison besides strength. Even if I know that the
relative strength of my desires will change, so that at a later time I will rank the satisfaction of these present desires
differently, that knowledge gives me no reason to change my reaction to my present desires—unless I happen to have a
stronger desire for the satisfaction of the desires I will have in the future.
The limits of such rational agency show how it falls short of Aristotle's demands. He says rational agents have decision
(prohairesis), while non-rational agents have only appetite and emotion (EN 1111b11–13, EE 1225b26–7, Phys.
197b1–8). Decision is deliberative desire (EN 1113a9–12); and so it seems to be the sort of desire that will result from
a rational appearance. It is a desire formed by deliberation beginning with some more general desire. But not just any
general desire can underlie a decision; it must be a wish (boulêsis), a rational desire for the good, not an appetite or
emotional desire.22
We might suppose that a plan based on just any second-order desire (e.g. ‘Do what you have the strongest desire for’;
‘Act to satisfy the largest number of desires’) counts as a desire for the good. But Aristotle demands more.23 The wise
person deliberates with a view not to this or that limited end, but with a view to living well (i.e. happiness, eudaimonia) in
general (1140a25–8). In this case living well is our end and we deliberate about how to achieve it (1111b28–30). Good
deliberation will ﬁnd what is suitable to the end that is grasped by wisdom (1142b31–3).24 This deliberation about what
promotes living well as a whole will form the wise person's rational wish, the way she conceives happiness; and this
conception of happiness will be the rational wish from which she begins the sort of deliberation that results in a
decision.
Aristotle thinks deliberation can do more than ﬁnd the action that will

338

CHAPTER 15 § 180

maximize the satisfaction of my current desires. For to ask about what promotes my happiness is not the same as to
ask about what maximizes the satisfaction of my current desires. A correct conception of my good requires some
conception of the sort of being that I am, some view of my nature, and some thought about the sorts of desires and
aims that best suit my nature. This aspect of deliberation implies a fairly extensive possible criticism and rational
assessment of current desires.25

180. The Temporal Aspects of Rational Agency
A fully rational agent, then, has a conception of herself and her life, and chooses things as goods for herself by
reference to her life as a whole. This is not a trivial difference from other agents. I might desire something
unreﬂectively, without considering any other desires at all. Again I might strengthen or weaken a desire by considering
the effects of satisfying it on the likely satisfaction of other desires I now have. In either case I am not necessarily
thinking about my good. Thought of my good requires thought of my life as a whole; and this requires the thought of
myself as existing in past, present, and future.
If I am moved by this thought, I will consider both my present and my possible future desires when I choose what to
do now. Consideration of my future desires is not the same as consideration of the future effects of my present desires;
and the agent concerned with her good must be concerned with herself as something present and future, not just with
the desires she has now. This is still a fairly weak condition. It does not imply that a rational agent sacriﬁces the present
to the future. Nor need she be prudent in the ordinary sense that implies thrift. She needs a more general form of
prudence that requires some degree of concern for herself as a temporally extended self.
Aristotle does not often notice this aspect of rational agency; but some of his remarks show that he assumes it and
relies on it. One of the types of association peculiar to rational agents is lifelong association between wife and husband.
Other animals associate to produce children, but human beings associate ‘for what concerns their life’ (1162a19–22).
‘Life’ here refers to the other aspects of one's present life besides child-bearing, but also to the other stages of one's
lifetime. Human beings are concerned for their welfare over their lifetimes. The temporal reference of ‘life’ is clearer in
the deﬁnition of a household as an association established ‘for every day’ (Pol. 1252b12–14). The most extensive
association, the city, is concerned ‘not with the present advantage . . . but with the whole of life’ (EN 1160a21–3),
where Aristotle again refers both to the content—the whole of life and not just a part—and to the length of time.

CHAPTER 15 § 180

339

This is one reason why the city is peculiar to human beings, who have a reasoned conception of the good, and not
merely awareness of pleasure (Pol. 1253a7–18). Animals and slaves are incapable of forming a city ‘because they have
no share in happiness or in living according to decision’ (1280a32–4). The lack of decision makes them incapable of
forming designs for themselves and their lives as a whole.26
These different remarks suggest that Aristotle believes that rational agents conceive themselves, and hence their good,
as extended both in the present and the future. A rational agent is aware of having a ‘whole life’ at the moment; he
considers what to do by reference to his other desires, not just the particular desire excited by this object. And he is
aware of himself as having a ‘whole life’ that extends into past and future, and is not restricted to the desires he is
aware of at the moment. The deliberation and decision that rest on this conception of a whole life are characteristic of
a rational agent.
The good of such an agent must be a complete good that belongs to a complete life (EN 1098a18–20); and a rational
agent will consider his particular desires and actions against some view of how they will affect his complete life. A nonrational animal or a child has no conception of his whole life or of how he might shape his desires in the light of this
conception; and so he is incapable of forming the states of character that Aristotle takes to be essential to happiness
(1099b32–1100a1).27
Aristotle's different conditions demand more of a rational agent than he initially suggests. If he is to argue that reason
marks out a distinct type of soul, he needs to show that it marks out a distinct type of life in which a creature ‘lives by’
reason, as opposed to appearance (cf. DA 415a8–11). He will not have shown what he needs if he shows only that a
rational agent deliberates about the ways to satisfy a particular desire. Even if the creature can deliberate effectively
about maximizing his desire-satisfaction, that difference does not clearly imply a different sort of life; it may just
indicate greater efﬁciency in the conduct of the same sort of life. But if Aristotle can show that a rational creature is
moved by reasoning about his good, resulting from reﬂexion on his life as a whole, he has good reason to claim that
reason marks out a different sort of life.
A rational creature's life, on this view, will aim at ends that play no part in explaining the non-rational creature's
behaviour. A plant's life is a different sort of life from an animal's in so far as appearance plays no role in the end that
the plant aims at, but does play a role in the animal's end. Similarly, the rational creature's end is partly determined by
his conception of himself and his good as a creature with different capacities and different temporal stages; Aristotle
has good reason to claim that such a creature has an essentially rational soul.

340

CHAPTER 15 § 181

181. Rational Agency and Responsibility
Aristotle's view of rational agency explains some of the assumptions of his ethical theory, by removing some of the
puzzles they raise if they are considered without reference to rational agency. We will see the importance of rational
agency if we follow Aristotle's own advice, and begin with some of the puzzles.
It is not immediately clear why he thinks human beings are the only ethical agents. Ethics is about the virtues of
character (êthos) that are acquired by habituation (ethismos); but non-rational animals can have their actions and desires
modiﬁed by training that involves rewards and deprivations, and hence they seem capable of habituation and of
forming a good or bad character.28
Aristotle seems to answer this objection by insisting that virtue and vice are objects of praise and blame; since only
voluntary (hekousia) actions are open to praise or blame, only agents who act voluntarily will be ethical agents. But this
answer only raises further puzzles. For he concedes that non-rational animals act voluntarily (EN 1111a24–6), and so
they should apparently be open to praise and blame.29 It seems reasonable in any case to claim that we can praise or
blame animals and children; in training and habituating them we can communicate our pleasure and pain in their
action, and so inﬂuence their behaviour. They still seem to count as ethical agents.
This conclusion is warranted only if we assume that mere communication of pleasure and pain is sufﬁcient for praise
and blame, and that an agent inﬂuenced by such communication is really a proper object of praise and blame. We
might instead reject the assumptions. Perhaps such an agent does not really deserve praise and blame, and perhaps the
positive and negative reinforcement we offer is not genuine praise and blame. Aristotle might reasonably argue that
normal adult human beings are properly praised and blamed for their actions, and that animals are not; though we try to
modify the behaviour of animals, we do not praise or blame them in the same way.30
Perhaps rational agents are morally responsible, and the proper sort of praise recognizes a responsible action. On this
view, animals, being incapable of responsibility, are not candidates for praise or blame, hence are incapable of the right
sort of habituation, and hence are incapable of virtue or vice. But if Aristotle accepts this answer, he owes some
account of responsibility that is distinct from his account of voluntariness; for voluntariness will not make the right
distinctions.
We can approach the same puzzles about ethics from another direction. The right sort of habituation results in a
virtue, and Aristotle thinks a virtue requires the right decision (prohairesis), not simply the

CHAPTER 15 § 181

341

right actions (1105a28–33). But his claim should puzzle us. We can see why he should require a permanent state that
causes the virtuous agent to do the right thing regularly; but why should this require the right decision? Decision
requires the wish and deliberation that are peculiar to rational agents; but both rational and non-rational agents are
capable of being habituated to form the right permanent inclination in favour of virtuous action. The question that
arose about responsibility seems to arise again; for Aristotle seems in fact to conﬁne his discussion to rational agents,
but gives no clear reason for conﬁning it to them.
If I act on my strongest occurrent desire, and my rational desire simply seeks to satisfy my occurrent desires, it is not
clear why my rational desire should leave me open to some special sort of blame and praise, or why I should be
especially responsible for the actions resulting from rational desire. For the character of the action depends on the
character of the occurrent desires, and I am related to these no differently from the way a non-rational agent would be.
It is not surprising that a theory such as Hume's, identifying responsible action with action caused by a persistent trait
of the agent, gives no reason to conﬁne responsibility to rational agents.31
In Aristotle's view, however, a rational agent is inﬂuenced by a conception of his life as a whole and the conception of
happiness that he wants to belong to this life as a whole. He can modify his particular desires, and vary his satisfaction
of them, according to his conception of happiness. His decision will reﬂect the results of his deliberation about his
happiness, and therefore will express the sort of attitude that a non-rational agent cannot take to himself. A virtuous
character formed by decision will express the agent's view that the sort of life he chooses for himself should include his
valuing the virtuous actions for their own sakes.
If responsible agents act on such a conception of their good, a special sort of praise or blame is especially suitable for
them. If we praise the agent for doing something good, he should be moved by the property of the action that he is
praised for, and not merely by properties that coincide with it. This agent is the virtuous person who decides on the
virtuous action for its own sake as part of his happiness.
We have some reason, then, to conﬁne praise and attribution of responsibility to rational agents, if we really praise
them for the way they have formed their conception of their good and expressed this conception in their actions. That
sort of praise is not appropriate to non-rational agents, since they do not form a conception of their good; they do not
conceive themselves as temporally extended agents with a possible good, and they do not modify their particular
desires to ﬁt that conception. Similarly, if virtue requires the formation of the right

342

CHAPTER 15 § 182

conception of one's good, it is reasonable for Aristotle to believe that it requires the right decision, and therefore is
conﬁned to agents capable of decision.

182. Aspects of Responsibility
Aristotle, however, seems to suggest that voluntary action is sufﬁcient for responsibility, and that an action not done by
force or because of ignorance is voluntary.32 If we are to show that he connects responsibility more closely with rational
agency, we need to show that he takes responsible action to require something more than these minimal conditions.
His conditions for voluntariness are more complex than they seem at ﬁrst sight. In deﬁning forced action he insists
that the origin of the movement must be external and that the agent himself must contribute nothing (1110a2). But he
also insists that forced action is always painful, so that what we enjoy cannot be forced (1110b11–13).33 He implies that
if you push me into my enemy and I am pleased, then the cause of my behaviour is not external and I contribute
something, even if your push would have had the same result whatever I thought or felt; for if what I do with pleasure
is unforced, it cannot have an external cause to which I contribute nothing. Aristotle suggests that in this case the
behaviour has an internal cause, and that I contribute to it, even though my contribution is quite unnecessary for the
result. He denies that such behaviour is involuntary, even though the actual causal sequence is just the same as it would
be in an involuntary action; the process of your pushing me and my bumping into my enemy would have been no
different.
Aristotle draws a related distinction in his discussion of ignorance. He argues that if I act because of ignorance, and do
not regret my action, I have acted non-voluntarily, but not involuntarily; involuntary action requires regret as well as
ignorance (1110b18–24, 1111a19–21).34 In this case also the causal process leading to the action will be just the same,
but the attitude of the agent separates the genuinely involuntary actions from the others.
The distinctions Aristotle draws are curious if he simply wants to identify the agent's actual causal relation to his action;
and since this relation concerns us in judgments of legal responsibility, these judgments are probably not his primary
concern. His distinctions are more reasonable if his primary concern is the relation of rational agency to the action.
Though my pleasure and pain may make no actual difference to what happens, they indicate my attitude to the action,
and so reveal my

CHAPTER 15 § 182

343

character (1104b3–11) and the decision that has formed it. If I appear to be forced to break a promise, but am pleased
by the result of this apparent force, I show that my character and decision are defective. I show the same thing about
myself if I act because of ignorance but without regret. Even if I would have avoided striking you so hard if I had
known the blow would disable you, my pleasure at the result of the action I did because of ignorance shows a disorder
in my character.
If Aristotle wants our judgments about praiseworthiness and blame-worthiness to focus on this aspect of the agent, he
is right to argue that the agent's pleasure affects his responsibility, even if it does not affect the action. But to focus on
this aspect of the agent is exactly to focus on the distinctive feature of rational agency, as we have described it—the
agent's conception of his good and the states of character he has formed to shape his whole life in a particular way.
Distinctions that initially seem anomalous turn out to be reasonable in the light of his view of rational agency.
Since Aristotle's discussion of involuntariness includes these elements that betray a more general concern with rational
agency, we can more easily understand why he thinks he has found a criterion for responsible action when he seems to
have found only a criterion for voluntary action.
He claims that in all voluntary action the origin must be in the agent (1110a17–18, 1111a22–4, 1113b20–1).35 But if
this internal origin ensures only voluntariness, it does not seem to ensure responsibility; Aristotle insists that animals
and children act voluntarily, but he never suggests that they are proper candidates for the sort of praise and blame that
suits responsible agents. If we act on appetite or emotion in the way an animal or child does, the origin seems to be in
us, as it seems to be in them; but if they are not proper candidates for responsibility, it is not clear why we should be, if
the causation of our action is the same.
This objection, however, overlooks the difference in the nature of the origin. When Aristotle says the origin is in ‘us’,
we need to ask more carefully what he identiﬁes with ‘us’. If we are essentially rational agents, then the origin will be
strictly in us only in so far as it is in our rational agency; otherwise it will only be incidentally in us, since one of our
non-essential features will be the origin. I have a rational soul in so far as I live by decision and rational planning resting
on some conception of my life as a whole. The origin that is internal to an animal ‘itself ’ will not depend on its rational
agency, since it is not essentially a rational agent. Since I am essentially different from an animal, the origin in me will
support claims about responsibility even though it would not support them for the animal.
This appeal to the origin in the agent does not imply that we are

344

CHAPTER 15 § 183

responsible only for the actions that are actually caused by our decision and deliberation.36 As we have seen, Aristotle's
search for the origin of an action leads him beyond the actual causal sequence to the agent's attitude and character.
Even if I act without deliberation and premeditation on a sudden impulse of emotion or appetite, the origin may still be
in my character and decision; for the presence or strength of my desire may be the result of the character and decisions
I have formed. I may have deliberately cultivated this sort of impulse, or I may have failed to do what I could
reasonably be expected to do to prevent its growth. If my voluntary actions are related in this way to my decision and
character, their origin is in me in the relevant sense, and I am fairly held responsible for them, even though an animal
would not be held responsible for its voluntary actions.37
The conception of rational agency that we have ascribed to Aristotle supports his claims in the De Anima and in the
Ethics. Without this conception he leaves serious gaps and anomalies both in his account of the soul and in his claims
about responsibility. The initial appearance of his dialectical argument fails to display his theory, and his eventual
conclusions do not seem to follow from the apparent dialectical argument. Neither feature of the discussion will
surprise us if we remember that Aristotle's argument is dialectical, but not purely dialectical, and that it legitimately
relies on the results of an argument ultimately resting on ﬁrst philosophy.

183. The Form of Human Beings
Our discussion of responsibility has led us beyond the De Anima in an effort to understand the distinctive
characteristics of the rational soul that Aristotle attributes to human beings. We can now usefully return to the tasks he
has set himself in giving an account of the soul, and see if he has fulﬁlled them. Two main questions need to be raised:
(1) Has he described all and only the genuine states of soul? (2) Has he justiﬁed his claim that the soul is the essence of
the creatures we call men, horses, etc.?
Aristotle has suggested that we can explain what psychic states are if we take them to be the states mentioned in a
teleological explanation of the behaviour of a living creature. Mental states are those that involve appearance and that
contribute to a teleological explanation of the creature's behaviour that involves reference to desire and appearance of
the good. Aristotle claims that psychic properties are the essential properties of logically possible subjects, and also of
actual subjects—the trees, dogs, and people familiar to us. These are material as well as

CHAPTER 15 § 183

345

formal; but their form is their essence. Their formal properties are permanent traits that explain behaviour and justify
us in thinking that some genuine substance persists as long as the individual instance of the speciﬁc form persists.
Aristotle identiﬁes the human soul with the type of rational agency that relies on a conception of the agent's good. He
must suppose that such a conception explains the behaviour of human beings, and that the persistence of a human
being is the persistence of a rational agent with a conception of his good. He can hardly require the very same
conception of my good to persist if I persist; in that case I would cease to exist whenever I understand more and
improve and whenever I lapse. It is more reasonable to identify the persistence of a human being with the persistence
of a conception of his good that is formed by the same thoughts, desires and experiences, and aims at the good of the
same self with the same or coherently changing future states and experiences. The states will change coherently in so
far as changing beliefs about my future circumstances or future good will cause changes in plans for my future good;
and my conception of my good will change coherently with my other states.
If this is Aristotle's view, he supposes that each human being is the human being he is because of his conception of
himself and his plans for the good of the self he conceives. If Socrates' plans suddenly changed, not because of
previous experience or reﬂexion causing the change, and he thought of his future self quite differently from the way he
had previously thought of it, then Socrates would have ceased to exist. If desires and plans for Callias' future welfare
were caused in just the same way as plans for Socrates' welfare, then Socrates and Callias would be the same person.
‘Just the same way’ excludes the normal case of one person's concern for the good of another; if I am concerned for
another's good, I think of his conception of his good as well as my conception of it, but I do not have to do this with
myself.
If Aristotle intends this feature of a human being to determine his identity, we might think he attends too much to a
type of practical reasoning that is a far less universal feature of human beings than he thinks it is. He will reasonably
reply that such an objection underestimates the extent and role of practical reasoning. To have a conception of my
good I need not have a conscious or detailed plan for my future welfare; I need to be ready to adjust one desire to
another and to think about the effects of my action on my future self, regarded as the same self that now chooses.
Continuity in these habits of choice and concern makes me a single self.
To test such a claim about the human essence we might see if it explains common practices and beliefs that rest on
assumptions about a

346

CHAPTER 15 § 183

person's identity and persistence. Aristotle supposes that his account of the essence of human beings explains why the
treatment accorded to them as responsible agents is appropriate for them. In so far as we take normal human beings to
be distinctively responsible for their actions, and in so far as we connect responsibility with rational agency reﬂected in
decision, we conﬁrm Aristotle's view that such rational agency is an essential feature of human beings. To this extent
Aristotle's account of responsibility shows how his psychology supports one element in the ethical principles
prescribing treatment of human beings.
Its relevance to ethics is still broader. The DA argues that the essence of human beings is their capacity for rational
thought, desire, and action—that these are the properties that mark them out as a distinct kind, from a teleological
point of view, and explain their vital activities as a whole. The Ethics is about what is good for creatures of this kind;
from understanding that human beings are essentially rational agents we are supposed to be able to form a theory of
their good. This theory will identify virtues and virtuous actions—states and actions promoting the good of human
beings, and for which they are appropriately praised.
The account of the human essence explains why human beings are the appropriate subjects for ethics. They are open
to praise and blame because they have the capacity for decision and for the rational desire that forms a conception of
the agent's happiness. It is the same capacity that makes someone a responsible agent and makes him an agent properly
concerned with ethics. Hence Aristotle offers his advice to ‘everyone who is capable of living in accordance with his
own decision’ (EE 1214b6–7).38
If Aristotle means this, he commits himself to quite a strong and initially implausible claim. It is essential to a human
being that he guides his action by a rational conception of his good referring to his whole life; and Aristotle seems to
claim that from this fact we can derive an account of his actual good that need not be identical with his good as he
conceives it. He seems to claim that someone's acting on a conception of his good implies that one conception is the
right one.
If this is really Aristotle's claim, and if he can justify it, then the psychology of the De Anima is still more important
than it has appeared to be so far. For its account of the human essence will determine an account of the human good,
and hence, in Aristotle's view of ethics, the foundation of a complete ethical theory. We may ﬁnd Aristotle's aim
interesting, or perversely misguided, or both; but we must consider its execution.

16 The Good of Rational Agents
184. Moral and Political Argument
The questions we have raised in previous chapters about the scope and powers of dialectical argument should apply
with particular force to the Ethics; for there the dialectical character of Aristotle's method is even clearer than in the
works on natural philosophy and metaphysics, and the empirical element is far less prominent. In looking for an
account of the human good he notices that the many disagree with the more cultivated (EN 1095a20–2); and to
resolve the disagreement he undertakes to examine (exetazein) the beliefs that are widespread or seem to have
something to be said for them (1095a28–30; EE 1214b28–1215a7).1
Aristotle does not conﬁne this dialectical method to the study of what is right and good for individuals. He applies it
equally to the structure and design of whole communities. He claims that the discipline undertaken in the Ethics is
political science (1094a26–b11, MM 1181a243–b27), and he continues the same inquiry in the Politics.2 It will be useful
to examine Aristotle's methods and doctrines in both works together. Though my exposition will be less orderly and
more digressive than a seriatim discussion would be, it should result in a clearer view of the structure and connexion of
the arguments and conclusions.
At ﬁrst sight, it seems clear that the Ethics practises pure dialectic. Aristotle insists that he does not practise
demonstration in this area.3 We are to begin from ‘the things known to us’ (1095b2–3), the common beliefs, and rely
on them as tests of any theory (EE 1216b26–8). We should attend to the appearances rather than relying completely
on theories that are removed from appearances (1217a10–17), and we should be reluctant to accept any theory that
conﬂicts with clear appearances (1145b27–9) or ‘forces’ the appearances (1236b21–3).
Proper attention to the appearances and to the puzzles they raise also seems to determine the character of our
preferred solution. Aristotle wants to dissolve the puzzles that arise from the initial survey of common beliefs and to
leave the original common beliefs standing (1145b2–7); and he suggests that a reply to the puzzles is a sufﬁcient
solution (1145b6–7, 1146b6–8, 1215a5–7). He assumes that we can take universal consent that certain things are
goods to show that they are goods (1172b36–1173a1); and this universal consent seems to constrain

348

CHAPTER 16 § 184

the solutions that need to be considered.4 We assume that the common beliefs are true, and simply need to be clariﬁed
(1216b28–35; cf. 1138b25–6).5
This is by no means a full and fair account of Aristotle's method in the Ethics, as we will shortly see. But it is plausible
enough for us to explore its consequences for Aristotle's aims in ethical inquiry. We have seen in general that if
Aristotle admits his conclusions rest only on pure dialectic, they have no claim on anyone who does not accept the
initial common beliefs that the arguments began from. This may not seem to matter when the initial beliefs are not
widely disputed; but even there we have seen that it does matter, if Aristotle wants to defend the objective truth of his
conclusion.6 In ethics, however, it matters more obviously if we take common beliefs for granted, since they are likely
to be controversial.
It takes an Eleatic or a Heracleitean or a Protagorean, some fairly radical and pertinacious philosopher, to reject all the
common beliefs that Aristotle appeals to in the Physics or Metaphysics—though even there we saw that, for instance, he
relies more heavily than he should on common beliefs about teleology. It does not take a philosopher to challenge the
ethical appearances; a radical critic of common ethical beliefs raises a practical, not merely a philosophical, challenge to
Aristotle's ethical principles. In Greek philosophy as in later philosophy, moral scepticism and nihilism seem to be
practically reasonable and signiﬁcant options in ways that other forms of scepticism and nihilism do not. It is fairly easy
to believe sceptics about the external world if they say they will go on acting like the rest of us and we will not notice
the difference; it is much harder to believe a similar assurance from consistent moral sceptics.7
It is rather tempting to suppose that Aristotle simply ignores this sceptical challenge, or even that he thinks he cannot
meet it. Plato clearly thinks it is both a signiﬁcant and an answerable challenge. Callicles in the Gorgias and
Thrasymachus, Glaucon, and Adeimantus in the Republic state the case against common morality; and they are not to
be answered by being told that their views conﬂict with evident appearances. Plato tries to answer them by an
argument that seeks to go beyond the appeal to appearances. We may well think Aristotle is less ambitious than Plato
here.8 He requires the student at his lectures to have been well brought up, precisely because the argument begins from
what is ‘known to us’ (1095b4–8). Someone who is too young or morally immature will get no beneﬁt from ethical
instruction (1095a2–11); early training is all-important (1103b23–5) because bad training makes us impervious to
sound moral arguments (1179b23–9).
We might easily (though, as we will see later, wrongly) suppose that

CHAPTER 16 § 185

349

in these passages Aristotle admits he cannot answer a radical critic. A purely dialectical method requires him to admit
as much, if his ethical conclusions rest on the common beliefs that a radical critic can consistently reject. Aristotle
admits that some people have been persuaded that the subject-matter of ethics, the ﬁne and the just, are mere matters
of convention (1094b14–16); and pure dialectic gives no answer to their doubts. If he is to answer the radical critics, he
must show that they have some further reason, besides an appeal to common beliefs, for accepting his premisses.

185. The Content of Ethics
Even if we defend moral arguments by more than pure dialectic, we might still not resolve doubts about morality. For
we might show that moral principles rest on objective facts, not just on common beliefs, but the facts might be of the
wrong sort to convince critics to take morality seriously. Political science considers the ﬁne and the just; but an account
of these might not answer the critic of morality.
Politicians concerned with moral education want to make the citizens ‘good people and obedient to the laws’
(1102a9–10); in prescribing the laws and requiring obedience to them they form the citizens in the practices and
attitudes that constitute general justice (1129b14–29); and these are ones that produce and preserve happiness for the
political community (1129b17–19). It is clear why the politician is concerned with general justice, since he is concerned
with the good of the community. But it is less clear why submitting to the politician's concern is in my interest, since I
have not yet been shown why it is in my interest to be concerned with the good of the community. Aristotle admits
that general justice seems to be ‘another person's good’, as Thrasymachus puts it in his objections to justice (1130a3–5;
Rep. 343c3–4, 367c2–3).
The same question can be raised about the ﬁne (kalon). In the Rhetoric Aristotle identiﬁes ﬁne and praiseworthy, in
contrast to expedient, action especially with action that reﬂects concern for others and not for the agent himself.9 The
community, or the dominant group or party or class in it, might reasonably commend and praise ﬁne action; but why
should a rational person choose to do, for his own sake, the actions that the community regards as ﬁne and just? Since
each of virtue of character is said to aim at the ﬁne (1122b6–7), the same question arises about all of them.
To answer the question, a rational person might try to form a conception of his own interest, so that he can see if ﬁne,
just, and

350

CHAPTER 16 § 185

virtuous actions, as commonly understood, really beneﬁt him. The Rhetoric (i 5) surveys the common beliefs about
happiness (eudaimonia); and the results of the survey scarcely recommend the virtues to the rationally self-interested
critic. Happiness includes as ‘parts’ the states, conditions, and possessions that seem to be needed to achieve security
and self-sufﬁciency (autarkeia) (1360b14–15, 24, 29); these will satisfy the desires and needs of the fairly demanding
person. The parts of happiness include health, wealth, good friends, good children, good old age, good fortune, and
also virtue and pleasure (1360b14–30), both internal goods—conditions of the person himself—and external
goods—conditions of his environment (1360b24–9).
This account of the parts of happiness gives no clear criteria for counting something as a part of happiness. Aristotle
offers ‘doing well with virtue’, ‘self-sufﬁciency of life’, ‘the pleasantest life with security’, and ‘prosperity of possessions
and bodies with the capacity to keep and achieve them’ as alternative general accounts of happiness (1360b14–18). He
does not decide between them; he does not show how each of them implies or suggests one or another list of the parts
of happiness; and he does not say how we choose when the different accounts lead to different lists of the parts of
happiness. But even an improved and systematized general account does not seem likely to support the claims of the
virtues of character aiming at the ﬁne. Though Aristotle certainly mentions these as parts of happiness, it is not clear
why he should. And if happiness has other parts besides the virtues, why should we not prefer these parts when they
conﬂict with the practice of the virtues?
In leaving these questions vague and unanswered, the Rhetoric probably represents common beliefs fairly well. Our
conception of happiness seems to rest on rather unsystematic common beliefs; we might well regard it as purely a
matter of convention, reﬂecting no underlying objective truths about the nature of happiness. And in any case, the link
between happiness and the virtues is not clear.
These questions make it especially important and hazardous to decide whether ethical theory has to rest on pure
dialectic. It is important, because the mere appeal to common beliefs seems to give critics of common morality no
reason to take it seriously if they reject common beliefs. It is hazardous, because we cannot be sure in advance that the
answer leading us beyond the common beliefs will actually justify the virtues, as common sense conceives them.
If Aristotle is to answer the critic, he need not defend precisely the common conception of each of the virtues; like
Plato, he is free to argue that common sense is wrong to some degree.10 But he needs some theoretical basis for
selection among common beliefs if he decides to revise them. In the Metaphysics he cannot fairly assume without

CHAPTER 16 § 186

351

argument that a correct conception of substance justiﬁes the common view that individual trees and dogs are
substances; he has to show why it would be wrong to agree with Platonists or Atomists against common sense. In the
course of defending common sense against these rivals he revises common sense; his own favoured candidate,
particular form, is not explicitly recognized by common sense, and common sense does not clearly see why the remote
matter and the material compound are inferior candidates. His solution involves claims about potentiality that at ﬁrst
seem counterintuitive; he requires us to say what we normally would not say, that the proximate matter of the tree is
potentially the tree when it actually constitutes the tree. Still, the account of substance is recognizably a defence of the
commonsense view of substance against rival views that depart widely from common sense.11
If, then, Aristotle can present a parallel defence of common ethical beliefs, showing that they rest on objective facts
independent of common beliefs, and that we are entitled to accept the connexion they assume between virtue and selfinterest, he will have answered a critic's reasonable questions about common morality.

186. The Direction of Moral Argument
In trying to answer a critic of morality, Aristotle considers happiness. For beliefs about happiness seem to raise the
most serious doubts about common morality; and if he shows that the doubts rest on a mistaken view of happiness, he
answers the critic. Aristotle needs to show that he has found a true account of a human being's happiness, and a true
account of the human virtues, and that these true accounts ﬁt together in the right way. The ﬁrst task is to see what
sorts of facts might help us to go beyond common beliefs.
Two directions of argument identify the relevant facts: (1) Aristotle constructs a theory of substance from premisses
supported by strong dialectic, relying on more than common beliefs. This theory supports an account of souls and
animate organisms, including rational agents. In approaching ethical problems Aristotle is entitled to appeal with some
conﬁdence to the conclusions he has reached by these other dialectical arguments that do not depend wholly on the
ethical common beliefs in dispute. (2) Fairly uncontroversial common beliefs about ethics suggest to Aristotle that his
account of substances and souls will be relevant. For it is plausible to assume that answers to the questions ‘What is the
good for F?’ and ‘What is a good F?’ both depend on the answer to the question ‘What is F?’. Both the good for a dog
and the goodness of a dog seem to depend on the sort of thing a dog is. An answer to the ﬁrst of

352

CHAPTER 16 § 187

these questions gives us an account of happiness, and an answer to the second gives us an account of virtue.12
Aristotle, therefore, has these two independent and mutually supporting reasons for believing that his account of the
rational soul in the De Anima should help him. It should help to answer questions about method in ethics, by showing
how ethical conclusions can rest on more than pure dialectic. Moreover, it might explain why a rational person with a
true conception of his own good has reason to accept and to cultivate the moral virtues that are commonly recognized.
The procedure of the Ethics is dialectical, without the degree of self-consciousness that we ﬁnd in Metaphysics iv; and
Aristotle regularly appeals to common beliefs without saying whether the particular beliefs he appeals to have any
further warrant than being commonly accepted. We must look at the premisses of his arguments, and ask ourselves
whether in fact he is entitled to claim further warrant for them, and whether he sees that he is entitled to claim it.

187. Tasks for the Politics
We cannot fairly assess Aristotle's argument in the Ethics without seeing how well he extends it to political inquiry. For
he describes the Ethics as a work of political science, the science that regulates and orders the practice of the other
sciences and crafts.
. . . its end will embrace the ends of the other sciences, so that its end will be the human good. For even if the good
is the same for an individual and for a city, still it appears greater and more complete to acquire and preserve 〈the
good〉 of a city; for we must be content 〈to acquire and preserve it〉 even for an individual by himself, but it is
ﬁner and more divine 〈to acquire and preserve it〉 for a nation and cities. Hence our method of inquiry aims at
this 〈good for individuals and cities〉, being a type of political science. (1094b6–11)
The all-embracing concern of political science makes it the right science to study the human good.
Aristotle does not say that in the Ethics he is concerned only with the individual, or that we can ﬁnd the individual's
good without ﬁnding the good for the city. He says we would have to be content if we could ﬁnd the good for ‘an
individual by himself ’; but this is not the same as the good for the individual. The good for ‘an individual by himself ’
will be his good, to the extent that we can grasp it without considering his relations to a state; and Aristotle warns us
here that the extent is quite limited, since we ﬁnd the complete good for an individual only when we consider his
relations to the state.

CHAPTER 16 § 187

353

The contrast between the limited good we ﬁnd by considering the individual in isolation and the more complete good
we ﬁnd by considering his relations to the state is clariﬁed later in Book i. For Aristotle argues that a complete and selfsufﬁcient end cannot be considered for an individual by himself, living a solitary life, but must include the good of
family, friends, and fellow-citizens, since a human being is naturally political (1097b8–11). The task of the Ethics is to
ﬁnd the complete good for an individual human being, and it cannot fulﬁl this task by considering only his good in
isolation from the good of others. It must, then, be a work of political science.
Later in the Ethics Aristotle explains more fully the political character of his account of the good. He supports his claim
that a human being is naturally political, by arguing that each person's self-realization requires her intrinsic concern for
the interests of others. A friendship formed by this intrinsic concern constitutes a community (or ‘association’,
koinônia) regulated by principles of justice aiming at its common interest; and to the extent that someone has reason to
form such a community, she has reason to accept the principles of justice for it. The Ethics assures us that the state will
hold a special place among the communities that realize different forms of friendship; for it is the all-embracing
community (1160a8–23), in so far as it regulates the others and nothing further is needed to regulate it; it is the
community that is necessary and sufﬁcient for securing the human good.
Aristotle does not explain how the state regulates other communities, or why such regulation is necessary; and in the
Ethics he fails to show how the state is the all-embracing community. Moreover, general remarks about ‘the state’ are of
limited use; for Aristotle knows as well as his readers do that there are different types of states with different political
systems (viii 10–11), and that differences in political systems affect the way a state carries out the roles Aristotle intends
for it.
The part of political science that concerns the Ethics is the account of an individual's happiness, and in particular of the
virtues whose realization is the achievement of happiness. Even if we have some account of the happy life, we have no
picture of the community in which it will be achieved; and in so far as the happiness of a community is a necessary part
of an individual's good, our account of the good must remain incomplete until the community is described. The Politics,
therefore, should offer some fuller account of the special role of the state in securing the human good, and of the
speciﬁc type of state that fulﬁls this role; it examines states in general, and the ideal state that achieves the human good.
Aristotle urges us to study political theory ‘so that as far as possible our philosophy about human matters will be
completed’ (1181b14–15).

354

CHAPTER 16 § 188

The argument of the Ethics would be incomplete without a political sequel; for if its ethical principles imply political
demands, we need to see how plausible these demands are. This question about the ethical principles would be
inappropriate if they were fundamental principles needing no further justiﬁcation or were wholly derived from such
principles. But Aristotle accepts neither of these foundationalist views about ethical ﬁrst principles or about their
metaphysical and psychological premisses. If his ethical principles or his assumptions about human nature do not
support his political views, then he has reason to reconsider all the views concerned. If his principles and assumptions
do seem to support his political views, but these views themselves seem to us quite mistaken, we have reason to
reconsider any sympathy we might have formed for Aristotle's ethical views. An examination of the Politics is important
for our view of Aristotle's larger philosophical outlook, not just for our view of his political theory.

188. The Aims of the Politics
Some books of the Politics discuss questions raised by the Ethics; Books i and iii discuss the nature of the state, and
Books vii and viii describe the ideal state, while Book ii criticizes previous accounts of it. But Books iv–vi take up the
empirical description and analysis, from a historical and sociological point of view, of political systems, and offer
practical hints of the sort that might be expected from a technician and consultant; they discuss the variety of actual
states, the causes of their instability, and ways of making them more stable.13 It is not obvious why the project begun in
the Ethics involves these further inquiries. We might infer that the Politics is a composite work, a loosely connected
compilation from separable types of inquiry, just as we might suppose that the Metaphysics is a collection of essays on
more or less similar topics rather than a continuous argument.14
We misunderstand the Politics, however, no less than we misunderstand the Metaphysics, if we do not see its unity.
Aristotle argues that the empirical and technical inquiries will help the argument about the best state.
First, then, let us try to review any sound remarks our predecessors have made on particular topics. Then let us
study the collected political systems, to see from them what sorts of things preserve or destroy cities, and political
systems of different types; and the reasons why some cities conduct politics well, and some badly. For when we
have studied these questions, we will perhaps grasp better what sort of political system is best; how each system
should be organized so as to be best; and what habits and laws it should follow. (EN 1181b15–22; cf. Pol.
1260b27–36)

CHAPTER 16 § 188

355

Common beliefs are to be found, not only in the statements of the many and the wise, but in the actual practice of
different states and in the judgments that the many and the wise pass on them. The best theory should explain and
defend what seems most reasonable in the political systems and our judgments on them.
Moreover, the nature of Aristotelian ethics itself shows why more detailed empirical study is needed. Ethical argument
should rest on facts about human nature; when it is extended into political theory it should rest on further facts about
human nature, and about human beings in relation to each other and to external circumstances. Appreciation of these
circumstances shows us why a community with speciﬁc institutions is needed to realize the human good.
The conception of the human good that is outlined in the Ethics is to be embodied in the best state described in the
Politics; and this best state has to assume highly favourable external conditions (1260b27–9, 1288b23–4, 1323a14–19).
But Aristotle claims that virtue is always the best policy, even if external conditions become unfavourable; and political
theory should guide us if external circumstances prevent full achievement of the human good. Aristotle wants not only
to ﬁnd the ideal state, but also to ﬁnd how each type of political system should be organized to reach its best condition
(1181b22). He argues that if we study the best system we should also study the best for particular external conditions,
the best ‘given an assumption’—the best version of each type of political system—and the system that best ﬁts most
states (1288b21–37).15
Ethical theory also guides empirical analysis. Empirical analysis seeks to understand the varieties and structures of
cities and their constitutions, and the sources of change and stability; and, in Aristotle's view, we understand these
things best from the correct conception of happiness and justice. Different cities pursue happiness and justice in
different ways; and they are stable or unstable partly because of their degrees of success and failure in achieving justice
and happiness. A correct ethical theory, as Aristotle understands it, will describe the psychological and social effects of
the different virtues and vices, and in doing so will allow us to form new causal hypotheses that we can test against the
empirical evidence.
In the Politics no less than in the Metaphysics, once we understand Aristotle's aims and arguments better, we can see the
unity and order in the treatise itself. He constructs the ideal state partly by reference to the empirical facts accumulated
in describing actual states, and his conception of the ideal state illuminates the structure and behaviour of actual states;
he cannot, therefore, offer a tidy linear argument.

356

CHAPTER 16 § 189

189. Difculties in Political Argument
The common beliefs used in the Politics are similar to those in the Ethics, those of the many or the wise, expressed in
current opinions and in previous philosophers. In both works Aristotle discusses both points of agreement and points
of dispute. But in the Politics there is a particular reason for the prominence of disputes. The Ethics sometimes refers to
disagreements about the interpretation of some general principle (e.g. 1125b8–18); but in the Politics such disagreement
helps to explain differences in political systems and of contending factions within a single system.16
The extent of agreement and dispute about happiness illustrates this general feature of common beliefs. While
everyone agrees that the best political system is the one that achieves happiness, and that happiness requires some
share in the virtues, people disagree about the role of virtue; many think that virtue is a relatively minor part of
happiness, and that external goods are the most important part (Pol. 1323a24–38). Even those who think virtue is
important disagree about whether the virtue should be political or philosophical (1324a23–35); and some of those who
value the political life think it requires us to seek power wherever we can (1324b2–3). Similar disputes arise about
justice. The contending parties agree that justice is some sort of equality and fairness, and that it requires equal
distribution to equals, but they cannot agree about the relevant standard of equality (1280a7–25).
These political disputes show us, more clearly than any other Aristotelian work shows us, some of the difﬁculties in
practising pure dialectic if we look for an answer with some claim to objective truth. We cannot pretend that we simply
record the consensus with minor adjustments. While most people may agree on a rough distinction between substance
and quality, or even on the list of the virtues of character, we cannot assume they agree on political principles. The area
of agreement seems too schematic to tell us anything clear or useful (as Aristotle suggests about some general features
of happiness; EN 1097b22–4). If constructive dialecticians want to ﬁnd anything that the disputing parties have reason
to accept, they must not embrace just one partisan view.17
Aristotle often argues that each of two conﬂicting views has something to be said for it, though neither is quite right as
it stands. He tries to arbitrate between the disputed beliefs, instead of simply supporting one side in the dispute.18
Arbitration, we might suppose, seeks a formula that both sides will accept; if they are keen enough to make an
agreement they will give up something, as long as

CHAPTER 16 § 189

357

they are not required to give up so much that the costs outweigh the beneﬁts of the agreement.
If this is what Aristotle does with beliefs about justice, his view might be no nearer the truth than either of the original
views was; indeed, the disputants might think it is further from the truth, though more expedient for present purposes.
This is often the attitude of those who compromise over legislation or over a resolution to be put to a vote. Two or
more ways of reaching such a compromise might be equally correct; it all depends on what each side wants, and they
might reach an equally satisfactory solution with one concession as with another.
Sometimes, and especially in the Politics, it is tempting to suppose that the arbitration Aristotle wants is a compromise
that each of the contending parties can live with, getting enough of what they want to make the agreement worth their
while. It is easy to form this impression about his defence of the middle class, and about his devices for repairing and
stabilizing different regimes. And it is easy to suppose that at a more general level the same compromising outlook is
the basis of his attempt to reconcile conﬂicting beliefs in his dialectical solution.
On this view, dialectic itself becomes a device for reducing tension and conﬂict, and for removing some of the
ideological sources of struggle. Philosophically as well as politically, Aristotle may seem to be an advocate of consensus
against conﬂict. In so far as he rejects radical challenges to accepted beliefs and institutions, his philosophy suits his
essentially conservative social and political preference.19 Unlike Socrates, Plato, Diogenes, and Zeno, he advocates no
startling deviations from the established moral and political order; and we may think the bias of his philosophical
method makes his conclusion predictable.
This cannot be the right picture of Aristotle's philosophical aims and outlook. Dialectic seeks to reach true answers by
examination of common beliefs, not simply a compromise that people can put up with if they have to. Aristotle notices
that some beliefs are formed in ways that undermine an impartial person's conﬁdence in them; most people are bad
judges when their own apparent interest is involved (Pol. 1280a14–22, 1287a41–b5; cf. EN 1109b1–12). These biased
judgments will not count equally with other beliefs. Just as we need impartial laws in a state to protect us against
personal biases (EN 1134a35–b1, Pol. 1287a28–32, 1318b38–1319a1), we need to look at common beliefs from an
impartial point of view that will lead us to be suspicious of some of them (EN 1113a33–b2). The arbitrator is an
ofﬁcer of justice, whose task is not to ﬁnd the distribution that the two parties can be persuaded to agree on, but to
ﬁnd the just distribution (1132a19–24; cf. Met. 995b2–4).

358

CHAPTER 16 § 190

190. Strong Dialectic in Political Theory
This line of argument shows us once again why Aristotle needs strong dialectic, to make up for the weakness of pure
dialectic. He thinks he can evaluate the common beliefs from a sufﬁciently independent point of view, because he has
metaphysical arguments to justify some of his leading principles, and especially those principles that support his view
of substance, form, matter, nature and essence. His metaphysical arguments are not non-dialectical, since they do not
stay outside common beliefs altogether. But they are not merely dialectical, since they rest on premisses that we must
believe if we are to believe in an objective world at all, or if we are to understand or explain nature. The arguments of
strong dialectic resting on these principles underlie Aristotle's conception of the soul and of human nature, which in
turn underlies the main claims of the Ethics.
Strong dialectic is used in the Politics also.20 Book i relies frequently and explicitly on claims about human nature, to
support claims about the nature of the city and its proper structure and functions. Similar claims are used in Book iii to
decide between different conceptions of citizenship and of justice. Since views about citizenship and about justice are
held to explain the differences between political systems, Aristotle's claims about human nature determine the
structure of both the ethical and the empirical parts of the politics. It is no less true in the Ethics that the claims about
human nature carry the main weight of the argument. But while these claims are relatively unobtrusive in the Ethics,
they are unmistakable in the Politics; it is clear that we must make up our minds about them if we are to decide about
the coherence and plausibility of the whole work.
The Politics, however, raises a rather serious question about Aristotle's principles. For he uses claims about human
nature, together with auxiliary empirical premisses, to support his belief in the justice of slavery, the inferiority of
women, and the exclusion of manual workers from full citizenship. If we reject Aristotle's conclusions, we must
challenge the validity of his argument or the truth of some of the premisses. If the argument seems valid and the
auxiliary premisses seem true, then perhaps we should reject Aristotle's claims about nature.
In any case, Aristotle's claims about nature easily raise doubts. He sometimes seems to rely on empirical generalizations
telling us what human nature is like; but on the other hand he dismisses some general tendencies as ‘contrary to
nature’, suggesting that his appeal to nature depends on something more than empirical generalizations or even natural
laws.21 But does the appeal to nature not rely on ethical principles that are themselves supposed to rely on appeals to
nature? The

CHAPTER 16 § 191

359

appeal to nature seems to rest on a blend of ethical and empirical claims that are honest specimens of neither.
The Politics, then, should make it especially clear to us both why Aristotle needs convincing arguments drawn from
strong dialectic and why it is hard to ﬁnd them. Difﬁculties in his method that are less obtrusive in other works are
evident here. To see if Aristotle can solve them, we must begin with his ethical ﬁrst principles and the further
premisses they rely on; and then we should see how far he develops a theory that avoids the objections raised against
his methods. Aristotle makes his argument depend on his account of the human good, and that is the place to start.

191. The Final Good
The EN begins by arguing that a human being has an ultimate good, an end that we wish for for its own sake, and for
the sake of which we wish for other things (1094a18–19). This ultimate end is happiness (1095a14–20), for the sake of
which all of us do all the other things (1102a2–3). Having shown that we pursue this ultimate good, Aristotle offers to
prove that it must meet some formal conditions—conditions that we can agree on before we consider any actual
candidates for the good. He argues that it must be complete and self-sufﬁcient (1097a15–b21). We need to examine
the character of the actual and possible arguments for these claims.
Aristotle does not simply assume that there is an ultimate good for human beings.22 He argues that there must be one,
because there is a supreme science; since every science and craft aims at some good, the supreme supervisory science
must aim at a good that is ultimate in relation to their goods (1094a24–7). This supervisory science is political science;
and it is supreme because it prescribes the proper pursuit of all the other sciences. Since it regulates the pursuit of the
other sciences, its end ‘includes the ends of the others, so that this would be the human good’ (1094b6–7). We pursue a
ﬁnal good if we pursue an end with the structure of the end of political science; and we have reason to pursue this ﬁnal
good if we have reason to pursue an end with this structure, including and regulating the pursuit of subordinate ends.
Aristotle addresses agents capable of forming their lives by rational decision.
On these points we must ﬁrst notice that everyone who is capable of living in accordance with his own decision sets
up some goal of living ﬁnely—either honour or reputation or wealth or education—with reference to which he will

360

CHAPTER 16 § 192

do all his actions; for not having one's life organized with reference to some end is a sign of much folly. (EE
1214b6–11)23
Decision and wish, as opposed to non-rational desire, are the mark of a rational agent, who acts on a deliberative, not a
purely perceptual, appearance (DA 434a5–11).24 A rational choice depends on comparison of the value of different
options to see which is best; and this comparison depends on some view of the good that each of them is to promote.
To make the right comparisons we need the conception of an inclusive good.25
An agent who was indifferent to the goals he might have in the future, and never took account of them in reaching his
view about what to do on this occasion, would have a conception of his ﬁnal good that might vary radically from one
occasion to another. Aristotle, however, argues that failure to have one's life organized towards some end is a sign of
much folly. He addresses an agent who is concerned about the character of his life, not simply with his desires at each
stage of his life.
Such an agent might have no explicit conception of the good; one task of the Ethics is to form such a conception. But if
he ﬁnds that his proposed action conﬂicts with his good, measured by considering the other goods he recognizes in his
life as a whole, then he tends to reconsider the action; and if he ﬁnds that an action promotes this good, he tends to
want to do that action. An agent is rational to the extent that he acts on these tendencies that are guided by his
conception of his good. So far Aristotle's assumptions are not arbitrary, and not mere matters of common belief. He
begins with reasonable assumptions about the desires of rational agents.

192. The Completeness of the Final Good
If we agree that rational agents pursue a ﬁnal good, we may not think we have conceded anything of interest for ethics.
For we have conceded nothing about the content of this ﬁnal good, and we may think the very general features of
rational agency we have mentioned determine nothing about this further question. Aristotle, however, disagrees. He
believes we can infer enough about the content of the ﬁnal good to show that any ﬁnal good that is a reasonable object
of pursuit by a rational agent is the sort of good that requires the Aristotelian virtues.
This project readily provokes doubt. We may compare Kant's attempt to argue from general features of moral agency
and from the necessary features of any moral principle, to deﬁnite conclusions about the character of the only morally
acceptable moral principle. We might

CHAPTER 16 § 192

361

say that in a similar way Aristotle tries to argue from the form of rational agency to the character of the virtuous moral
agent. ‘Form’ here is used in the Kantian sense rather than the Aristotelian; but in this case the connexion with the
Aristotelian conception of form is rather close.26
Aristotle follows the dialectical method that we have examined in the Metaphysics and De Anima. Consideration of the
puzzles identiﬁes the preliminary questions. Aristotle approaches these questions by ‘making a new start’, appealing to
some basic principles not open to reasonable dispute. Though the principles may seem trivial or platitudinous to some,
Aristotle thinks they are the key to a proper resolution of the puzzles. In the Metaphysics we can agree that a substance
must be a subject and an essence, before we decide whether Democritean atoms or Platonic Forms or Aristotelian
individual organisms satisfy the criteria. It is important to see that each of the contending parties has reason to accept
the criteria, so that they can fairly be used to test the candidates and to rule out the Platonist and Atomist candidates.27
In the De Anima he makes a new start by assuming that the soul is the primary cause of life, and arguing from this to
his conception of the soul.28
In EN i he recognizes disputes about the life that is the successful candidate for being the ﬁnal good (1095a16–28), but
instead of answering them directly, he makes a new start (1097a15–25). He sees that the disputes about the candidate
for happiness raise preliminary questions about criteria for happiness; what sort of thing raises the dispute about
whether it is wealth, honour, pleasure, and so on? He suggests that the ﬁnal good must meet two formal criteria, by
being complete and self-sufﬁcient. These are formal criteria in so far as we can agree that an acceptable candidate for
the ﬁnal good must satisfy them, even before we agree that any candidate is successful.29
Aristotle claims that the ﬁnal good must be complete (teleion) (1097a25–b6); even though we pursue many goods for
their own sakes, one complete good is our ultimate end. Aristotle claims that an unconditionally complete end must
always be chosen in each of our choices, always for its own sake, and never for the sake of any further end
(1097a33–4); and he assumes that a rational agent can pursue only one such end. He therefore rejects the possibility
that there are several goods that meet this condition, each pursued for its own sake and none pursued for the sake of
anything else.30
For Aristotle, anything complete must be a whole, leaving nothing outside (EE 1219b7–8, Phys. 207a8–10, Met.
1021b12–23, 1023b26–34), and a uniﬁed whole, in contrast to a mere collection.
In one way we call a thing one if it is a quantity and continuous. But in another way we do not call anything one
unless it is some sort of whole—that is to say,

362

CHAPTER 16 § 192

unless it has one form. We would not say, for instance, that the parts of a shoe were one thing in such a way, if we
saw them combined in any old way, but only that they were one by continuity; we would say they were one thing
only if they were combined so as to be a shoe, and thereby had one form. Hence the circle is the line that, more
than any other, is one, because it is whole and complete. (Met. 1016b11–17; cf. 1024a6–8, Phys. 228b11–15)
If we claim to pursue pleasure, honour, and virtue for their own sakes only in all our actions, Aristotle replies that we
also pursue them for the sake of happiness, the ﬁnal good, so that really only one end satisﬁes the condition for
unconditional completeness (1097a34–b6). He assumes that a rational agent wants her life to be a whole, not simply a
collection of ends without further structure. If we agree about this, we will agree that only one end is unconditionally
complete, and that it must cover the whole of a person's life; any less global end would have to be chosen for the sake
of a whole life that includes it as a part.
We already know that Aristotle regards a substance as a whole, and therefore as a unity that is more than a mere heap
(sôros) of its parts (Met. 1040b5–10).31 He requires the parts of an organism's life to have the same sort of structure,
both synchronic and diachronic, and in a rational agent he assumes some awareness of the structure. Since he relies on
this assumption about rational agents, he has some justiﬁcation for the assumption that might otherwise seem
arbitrary, that there is only one unconditionally complete end.32

193. The Self-Sufciency of the Final Good
If we allow Aristotle to assume that the ﬁnal good is complete, and we agree that what is unconditionally complete
must be some sort of organized whole, we may still ﬁnd his conception of the good quite indeterminate. The organic
whole that I see in my own desires and aims will depend on what I initially desire, and the organic whole you see in
your desires will depend on your, perhaps quite different, initial desires, so that lives with quite different aims will
satisfy the same formal condition. Since, on this view, one's good will be relative to one's desires and aims, we may call
it a conative conception of the good.33
A conative conception makes the rest of the Ethics seem unconvincing. For Aristotle thinks the same fairly speciﬁc
states are virtues in everyone, and this is why the Ethics is about êthos, character; but the conative conception of the
good cannot justify his account of the virtues.
He might, then, deny that an agent who achieves a complete conative good really achieves a complete good. If some of
our desires are

CHAPTER 16 § 194

363

mistaken, and there are some goods that we neither desire nor achieve, our rational aims cannot achieve a complete
good. On this view, the complete good is determined by objective norms and standards, beyond the agent's desires, for
real goods. Let us, then, call this a normative conception of the good.34
Aristotle's initial exposition of completeness does not show whether his conception of the complete good is normative
or conative. But he introduces a second formal condition, self-sufﬁciency.
By self-sufﬁcient we do not mean sufﬁcient for a person himself on his own, living a solitary life, but sufﬁcient also
for parents, children, and wife and, in general, for friends and fellow-citizens, since a human being is by nature a
political 〈animal〉 . . . we suppose that what is self-sufﬁcient is what all by itself makes a life choiceworthy and
lacking in nothing. (1097b8–15)35
Since he claims that the complete good seems to be self-sufﬁcient (1097b7–8), the account of self-sufﬁciency explains
how he understands completeness.
Aristotle must reject a purely conative account of the ﬁnal good. For we have no reason to suppose that all rational
agents want to realize their political nature. Some may apparently be indifferent to many aspects of their nature; and
Aristotle will say they have mistaken desires, because they do not determine their conception of their good in the right
way. His account of self-sufﬁciency, and hence of completeness, is normative.36 We achieve a complete good, according
to the normative conception, only if we completely fulﬁl our nature, not if we simply fulﬁl our conception of our good.
A purely conative conception would make the ﬁnal good a weak foundation for Aristotle's theory of virtue. A
normative conception avoids this objection; but it seems to face another. A conative account seems to rest fairly ﬁrmly
on necessary features of a rational agent, and to this extent supports Aristotle's theory from something more than
common beliefs. So far we have found no similar support for a normative interpretation of the formal criteria.

194. Rational Agency and the Human Function
To support a normative account of the ﬁnal good Aristotle appeals to the function of a human being.37 Relying on the
De Anima, he assumes that the function of an organism will consist in some kind of life, and considers the different
kinds of lives. Since these correspond to the different grades of soul listed in De Anima ii 3, he passes easily and
permissibly from talk of life to talk of souls (1098a7). Each different type

364

CHAPTER 16 § 194

of soul is named after its dominant and distinctive potentiality. An animal's soul is perceptive because perception is the
feature that distinguishes animals from plants and because an animal's desires and actions are guided by perception.
But the function of a perceptive soul is not conﬁned to perceiving; it includes a nutritive part as well as parts for
perception, imagination, and desire.38
Aristotle's way of distinguishing souls is important when we come to consider the proper function of a human being,
which is ‘some life of action of the rational part; and part of this is rational as obedient to reason, part as having reason
and thinking’ (1098a3–5).39 In conﬁning the human function to a life of action of the rational part, Aristotle does not
exclude all animal or vegetative activities. He assumes only that rational activity is the distinctive and essential feature of
the human soul, and that this organizes the human being's other activities in the way perception organizes a nonrational animal's other activities. The life of action will include other activities besides the activity of reasoning; but in a
human being they are essentially guided by reasoning.40
This view of what the human function includes should make it easier to believe Aristotle's claim that there is one. The
appeal to function rests on the conception, defended in the De Anima, of natural organisms as goal-directed systems;
different types of goal-directed action explain the behaviour of different types of organisms, and justify us in ascribing
different souls to them. To claim that the human function consists in a life according to reason is to claim that human
behaviour is teleologically explicable as the product of practical reason guiding other activities. This is a plausible claim,
if the general conception of the soul in the DA is plausible, and if Aristotle is right about how the human soul ﬁts into
that general account.
Aristotle argues that if the human function is ‘actualization of the soul according to reason or involving reason’
(1098a7–8), the human good will be ‘actualization of the soul according to virtue’ (1098a16–17). ‘According to virtue’
has to replace ‘according to reason’, because particular human beings might exercise their rational capacities
incompletely or perversely, even though, being essentially rational agents, they exercise them to some degree. A good
musician exercises his function as a musician completely and correctly, and so achieves his good qua musician; a similar
restriction is needed to infer the human good from the human function.41
Evidently this account of the human good leaves us with many unanswered questions. We have still not learnt much
about what a virtue will require; that is a question for the rest of the Ethics. However, Aristotle still thinks we have
learnt something; for he deﬁnes a virtue in

CHAPTER 16 § 194

365

general as a state that will make the possessor perform his function well (1106a15–17). We avoid an uninformative
circle of deﬁnitions if we can form some reasonable views on what is required for performing the human function
well.
Why should facts about the human essence determine what is good for a human being? Why prefer such a normative
account of the good to a purely conative account that makes a person's desires determine what is good for him?
Aristotle might fairly argue that if we consider the good for a non-human organism, we will ﬁnd it in fulﬁlling the
function of the organism; a plant or animal ﬂourishes if it fully displays its characteristics as a member of the species it
belongs to, not if it displays the characteristics of something else.
Indeed, we will even ﬁnd it hard to identify the essential functions of the species without some reference to the good of
members of the species; for the essential functions will be those that are essential to a normal member of the species,
those that teleologically explain the other properties and behaviour of the organism; but a teleological explanation must
show how the characteristics and behaviour tend to the good of the organism, and so we need some conception of this
to ﬁx the teleological explanations.42 In the same way, we might argue, we need to ﬁx a human being's good by
reference to what a human being is—otherwise we will be describing the good for some other sort of creature; and
some of our views about the human good will inﬂuence our views about the essential characteristics of a human being.
But if we concede these points to Aristotle, we may doubt their relevance to ethics. Let us suppose we can form a
quasi-biological conception of human ﬂourishing and welfare corresponding to our conception of the welfare of
another species. Why should we agree that this conception is relevant to the choices of a rational agent? Why should he
not be indifferent to the effect of his actions on his welfare as a ﬂourishing specimen of humanity, if he prefers to
realize his own particular desires and preferences? Even if we accept a normative account of the human good, we
might apparently reply that this has no bearing on human happiness, and no necessary claim on a rational agent.
Aristotle has appealed to the necessary structure of a rational agent's choices and to the essential properties of a human
being. In both cases he makes a metaphysical claim that rests on more than pure dialectic. But to reach the result he
wants, he needs to combine these claims, and to show that a rational agent has reason to attend to the properties that
Aristotle takes to constitute the human function. If Aristotle can show this, he can show that a rational agent has
reason to accept a normative account of his good in his own conception of his happiness.

366

CHAPTER 16 § 195

195. Rational Agency and Human Capacities
To see if Aristotle can defend the claims he needs, we may return to his initial conception of a rational agent. Such an
agent forms a conception of what is best to do by considering the present and the future, as parts of the same life.43 I
think of myself as the owner of some future desires; but my self is not exhausted by my present and future desires.
Sometimes I can act so that I will or will not have particular future desires, and I must consider which it will be better
for me to have. In deciding this I cannot consider simply my future actual desires, since these are precisely the ones I
need to decide about. Nor should I consider simply my present actual desires. Perhaps I now have an aversion to
buying an expensive violin since I have neither the interest nor the competence to play it. But perhaps it is open to me
to form and to satisfy the desire to play a violin well; and after I do that perhaps I will want an expensive violin. It
would be unreasonable of me to refuse to set out on the course of action that will result in the desire for a violin,
simply because I don't want the violin now. On the other hand, I might decide not to seek a particular sort of job
because if I get it and succeed in it I will form the sort of outlook that I now reject, even though I will be quite content
with it then.
In neither case can I ﬁnd an answer to the deliberative problem by simply thinking about desires I have or will have.44 I
have to think of myself as consisting not only of desires, but also of capacities that may or may not be actualized; my
deliberative questions are about which capacities I should actualize by forming and fulﬁlling one or another desire, and
about the effect of actualizing one capacity on the actualization of others. Evidently I must deliberate in the light of the
values I have, since nothing else is available to me; but I will try to form my desires by considering the interests of my
self as a whole, not simply my present or future desires.
Deliberation about the actualization or non-actualization of capacities is an expression of concern for oneself, and it
should show itself in the same way as it shows itself in choosing between actual desires. When I think about which of
my actual desires I should satisfy, I will intend to satisfy more rather than fewer; and the more I can satisfy, the better,
other things being equal. (The reservation here is needed to accommodate the degree of importance that I attach to
some desires over others.) If we deliberate similarly about capacities, we have reason to prefer the actualization of more
rather than fewer. For we are concerned with the interests of the self as a whole, and if capacities are left unactualized
we will be denying them any attention and satisfaction in our plans, and so failing to take account of the whole self in
our deliberations.

CHAPTER 16 § 195

367

Here, then, we have argued from the pattern of self-concern shown in deliberation about desires, to show that rational
agents will be concerned about actualizing more of their capacities rather than fewer. If a self consists of capacities, and
not only of desires, its satisfaction consists in the actualization of capacities, not only in the satisfaction of desires.
This argument does not show that rational agents necessarily act on some concern for the realization of their
capacities. But if it is sound, it shows that those who fail to act on such a concern fail to act on the consequences of
principles they already accept. Some concern for a conative ﬁnal good is a necessary feature of a rational agent; and
while concern for actualization of capacities is not necessary, it is reasonable for any rational agent.
Aristotle identiﬁes the good with the realization of human capacities; and he takes this identiﬁcation to explain why we
prefer the active to the passive aspects of friendship.
The reason for this is that being is choiceworthy and lovable for all, and we have our being in so far as we are
actualized, since we have our being by living and acting; and the product is, in a way, the producer in actuality; hence
the producer is fond of his product, since he is also fond of his own being. (1168a5–8)45
This feature of our good explains why we should prefer activity to passivity. If we are simply affected by external
objects and events, we exercise our passive capacities; but these are relatively simple, and do not involve the exercise of
many other capacities.46
The distinction between passivity and activity reﬂects the important difference between those processes that realize
more and fewer of our goal-directed capacities. If we choose simply to be pushed around by external objects, we use
only the capacities that belong to us as physical objects. If we choose to be mere perceivers, we are leaving unused the
capacities that are involved in using perceptions to guide action. Aristotle uses the single term ‘energeia’ both for
actuality, as opposed to mere potentiality, and for activity, as opposed to inactivity or passivity. The ﬁrst use explains
the second. For the reasons Aristotle suggests in his discussion of artistic production (1168a7–9), we value activity
because it is fuller actualization. In goal-directed action we fully display and realize our capacities as rational agents; in
passivity we display only the limited range of capacities that are needed for us to be affected.
In these claims about actualization and activity, Aristotle suggests an answer to a reasonable question about his account
of the good. His general claims about a rational agent may still leave us unmoved if we do not think they correspond to
any of our considered views about a

368

CHAPTER 16 § 195

person's happiness or welfare. If we ﬁnd no correspondence, we must conclude that our common beliefs, and the
purely dialectical argument that might rest on them, are quite unconnected with the conception of a person's good that
Aristotle tries to derive from metaphysics and strong dialectic. We might concede the truth of a metaphysical account
of the human good as the realization of rational capacities, and still deny that we are concerned with any such good in
our common judgments about welfare and happiness.

196. Rational Agency and Happiness
For this reason, Aristotle thinks it worth his while to show that the ﬁnal good and happiness meet the same formal
conditions (1097a34, b15–16); even though the identity of happiness with the ﬁnal good is widely agreed (1095a14–22,
1097b22–4), it is not trivial. For it is important to see that our common judgments about happiness match the
metaphysical conditions imposed on the Aristotelian account of the good; if Aristotle cannot show this he will not have
given an explanation and justiﬁcation of our common judgments about happiness.
He suggests that we agree with him in so far as we reject a purely conative or passive conception of happiness.
No one would choose to live with a child's level of thought throughout his life, even if he took as much pleasure as
possible in the sorts of things that please children, or to enjoy himself in doing one of the most shameful actions,
even if he were never going to suffer pain. (1174a1–4; cf. EE 1215b23–6.)
Similarly, we are right to deny happiness to a satisﬁed person who is satisﬁed by the wrong things, or lacks the
appropriate sort of rational activity.
On these grounds we can rule out the three most popular candidates for happiness—the lives of gratiﬁcation, honour,
and virtue. The life of gratiﬁcation is ﬁt only for grazing animals (1095b19–20), not for rational and active subjects.
The life of honour depends on our being honoured by other people, and therefore makes us passive, not active, in
relation to the most important aspect of our happiness; against this we intuitively believe that the good is ‘something of
our own’, expressing our rational agency, not something that leaves us essentially passive (1095b23–6; cf. 1159a12–33).
If we identify happiness with virtue, we must claim that someone can be happy when he is asleep or when he is
suffering terrible misfortunes (1095b31–1096a2). Aristotle thinks we will agree that this is an absurd claim because
both conditions prevent rational activity; when we are asleep we are inactive, and in terrible

CHAPTER 16 § 197

369

misfortunes we are victims of circumstances that ‘impede many activities’ (1100b29–30).
In all these cases Aristotle expects us to agree with him in rejecting a proposed candidate for happiness, because the
type of life it deﬁnes includes too little rational activity. Either it is largely passive or the activity it involves is nonrational. Indeed these two objections are scarcely separable; for a life that includes very little rational activity will engage
so few of the agent's capacities that it will appear to be largely passive rather than active. In rejecting such candidates
for happiness, we rely on the intuitive judgments that are explained by Aristotle's appeal to self-realization in ix 7. He
argues that if we think a human being's welfare does not require the completion of human nature, we are failing to
remember that we are concerned with the welfare of a human being, not of some other kind of thing.47

197. Self-Realization
We can support Aristotle, if we appeal to common judgments about a person's welfare, or about when one person is
better off than another. It is useful to begin with a purely hedonist conception, even more subjective than a conative
conception, to see the sorts of reasons that incline us in Aristotle's direction. We do not think A is necessarily better off
than B if A is immensely pleased because of some false belief about his situation; even though A may think he has got
all he wants, he will be wrong, and we normally think this is a cruel deception.
Nor is A necessarily better off than B if A has more desires fulﬁlled than B has. If A's desires are very few or very
foolish, we may think A is worse off than B; we would not necessarily advise B in her own interest to reduce her
desires to A's level just because the lower level is more easily satisﬁed. Nor would we immediately suppose that A
becomes worse off if he acquires more desires that are harder to satisfy. If, for instance, A has been content to be illtreated and abused, but comes to realize he deserves better and to resent the ill-treatment, he may be to that extent
better off, even though he has acquired a new unsatisﬁed desire.
The nature and essence of persons may also affect our judgment about their welfare. We could change someone's
desires so that he is able to satisfy them all, and yet might still say that he is worse off now than he was before his
desires were changed. A brain operation reducing someone's mental functions to those of a dog might remove all
previous dissatisfactions, but we would often be convinced even so that it would involve serious harm to the person,
even if he wanted it done—no less

370

CHAPTER 16 § 198

harm than he would suffer if he felt like having both his legs painlessly amputated and never felt any regret for them
after losing them. In both cases the explanation of our judgment supports Aristotle; when a person is deprived of
some essential human function, or the basis of other human functions, he suffers a severe harm. Indeed, if he is
deprived of enough of these functions he will have been destroyed.
Similar assumptions about a person's nature seem to support our views about the reasonable expansion of desires. If A
expands his desire for steak on Wednesday to a desire for steak on Wednesday, caviar on Thursday, and trufﬂes on
Friday, he has acquired more demanding desires, but so far we have no particular reason to think he has increased his
welfare. On the other hand, if he comes to resent his patronizing treatment by B, or if he comes to want some more
challenging occupation than a boring job followed by mindless amusement, we might well think he is better off. The
expanded desires that seem relevant to his welfare are those that are more suitable for a rational agent, and tend to
realize a rational agent's special capacities. In so far as we agree with Aristotle in rejecting the life of a child, we reject it
as inappropriate for the sorts of rational beings that we are.
Aristotle can claim support in common beliefs for his claim that our judgments about a being's good and welfare are
guided by our judgments about the being's nature and essence. On this score the welfare of persons is no different
from the welfare of other biological kinds, and Aristotle is justiﬁed in claiming that his argument from function to
welfare works as well for persons.
We have no reason, then, to dismiss the connexion he wants to ﬁnd between his metaphysical claims about the essence
of persons and our judgments about welfare and happiness. He cannot do without some appeal to common beliefs;
but he can fairly claim that his appeal involves more than pure dialectic, in so far as it relies on a theory which has the
support of ﬁrst philosophy.

198. Self-Realization and Human Good
We have seen some reasons for accepting Aristotle's account of the human good as the actualization of a human
being's capacities as a rational agent. Still, the account will be useless if we do not know what counts as a single
capacity, and hence do not know whether we have realized more or fewer. If a single capacity corresponds to every
true sentence of the form ‘I am capable of F’, then I seem to realize an indeﬁnitely large number of minimally different
capacities, by raising my arm at 10.00 a.m., 10.01, 10.02, etc. If we reply that these all realize

CHAPTER 16 § 198

371

just one capacity, the capacity to raise my arm, then surely we can collapse many other capacities into one by providing
less speciﬁc descriptions.
In reply we may argue that we are interested in counting capacities of widely differing types. Someone may claim to
have realized ﬁve capacities by raising his arm at ﬁve different times; but these may be very similar capacities, in so far
as they require very similar thoughts, desires, and bodily movements for their exercise. We can reasonably say that
someone who both moves his arm and moves his foot has realized more signiﬁcantly different capacities than
someone who moves his arm at ﬁve different times.
If we say this, we need to rely on some understanding of signiﬁcant difference in capacities, to show why the different
times of raising an arm do not constitute a signiﬁcant difference. Here we can rely on the different processes in the
agent himself; though the external conditions differ, the capacity is the same if the same process realizes it. Moreover,
in determining difference of process we will fairly pay more attention to the mental cause than to the bodily behaviour
it causes. If very similar processes of thought and desire result in two movements M1 and M2, and a very different
process results in M3, which looks rather similar to M1 and M2, we will say that we realize more signiﬁcantly different
capacities in M1 and M3 than we realize in M1 and M2, since the causes are so different. With these sorts of
restrictions—which no doubt need to be further reﬁned—we can avoid objections that would reduce claims about
capacities to triviality. The same considerations will show us how to avoid a foolishly quantitative conception of what is
required to realize capacities.
Aristotle's teleological account of capacities implies that a subject has different capacities only if it has states that are
explained by different ﬁnal causes—states that differ in the ways they do because they are for different actualizations.48
Capacities for slightly different movements count as the same capacity if the different movements have the same
explanation. A carpenter can make a chair in two slightly different ways with slightly different movements; but if the
slight differences are irrelevant to his craft, he will not exercise different capacities, since the (alleged) two capacities will
not be for two different ends. If Aristotle is allowed this fairly systematic way to distinguish capacities, he need not be
forced to admit that different human capacities are realized in trivially different activities.
We may still suspect, however, that appeal to realization of capacities will lead to absurdly mistaken conceptions of the
human good. If we try to realize as many capacities as we can, then apparently we will always strain for diversity; we
will want to hold our breath under water as long

372

CHAPTER 16 § 198

as we can; to see how long we can survive at the North Pole; never to do anything very well, since we will always want
to do something new; to realize all our cruel and sadistic capacities as well as our sympathetic capacities.
A clearer view of capacities may answer these objections. The objections assume that the range of activities reﬂects the
range of capacities realized; but the assumption is probably false. We may realize more capacities in learning to perform
one activity well than in learning to perform several badly; the advice to realize different capacities need not require us
to repeat the very similar elementary processes of learning to play several instruments badly, but may require us to
develop the wider range of skills involved in learning to play one instrument well. Nor need we agree that immoral or
absurd activities realize distinctive capacities. We might realize more capacities if we learn to enjoy playing tennis than if
we learn to enjoy playing catch; but we have no similar reason to believe that we realize more capacities in sadistic than
in sympathetic pleasure.
To estimate the force of apparent objections we must also remember a rational agent's legitimate concern with the
structure of his life as a rational agent. He will have to select from possible realizations of capacities those that are less
likely to impede others, those that are more likely to encourage others, and those that allow the fuller exercise of
rational agency. If we keep these conditions in mind, we are less likely to suppose that self-realization requires the
encouragement of bizarre or immoral activities.
This defence of self-realization does not show that Aristotle's conception of human good is beyond reasonable
objection. So far we have found only that it does not collapse immediately in the face of obvious objections, and
therefore that we have to examine its implications more carefully to see if they lead to reasonable results or not. His
conception of the good rests on strong dialectic, on principles derived from metaphysics and psychology; and so far we
have found no reason to dismiss the ethical theory that he seeks to construct on this basis.

17 The Virtues of Rational Agents
199. Virtue, Happiness, and Nature
Aristotle's ethics rests on his conception of happiness. Still, its primary topic is virtue, not happiness; and it is not
immediately evident why an account of happiness should help us to ﬁnd an account of the virtues. The recognized
virtues seem to be those that beneﬁt other people; they are deﬁned by reference to the ﬁne, not to the agent's own
good. Aristotle needs to argue that a fuller account of the agent's good will actually explain and justify the recognized
virtues that are concerned with the good of others.
It is easy to overlook this question, because Aristotle, quite legitimately, presents another conception of virtue that is
derived directly from his claims about happiness. He has argued that happiness is the good performance of the human
function, and that therefore it is the realization of the soul in accordance with complete virtue in a complete life.
Complete virtue consists of those states and conditions that promote the best sort of realization of human functions.
This sort of virtue makes its owner perform her function well (EN 1106a14–24, 1139a15–17, EE 1218b37), and
‘completes’ nature (1103a23–6; Phys. 246a13, 247a3); it is eudaimonic virtue. But since the moral virtues are the primary
topic of political science, some further argument is needed to show that the reference to human function explains the
nature of the moral virtues as well.
Aristotle does not believe he equivocates when he uses ‘virtue’ for both the eudaimonic and the moral virtues; for he
thinks the two types of virtue are really the same, and this is why he thinks the study of the human good answers some
critics of the moral virtues. A full understanding of the eudaimonic virtues should also display the moral virtues, and
explain how the moral virtues contribute to the good of the virtuous person.
Virtue is important because it expresses our nature as responsible agents. A person differs from other substances in
being responsible for her actions; and we have seen that Aristotle explains this distinctive feature of persons by
deriving it from their essential property of rational agency.1 A person is responsible for her actions and states in so far
as they proceed from states that are in her control as a rational agent. By

374

CHAPTER 17 § 200

forming her desires, aims, patterns of deliberation, and decisions in a particular way she exercises her capacities as a
rational agent, and becomes a candidate for praise and blame. The result of her formation of these states is her
virtuous or vicious character. To develop a virtue is to express our essence as rational and responsible agents, and to
that extent the cultivation of virtues must be a part of a rational agent's good. To fail to apply rational choice and
deliberation to the formation of states of character would be to fail to recognize ourselves as rational agents in this
most important respect.
If I rationally choose to form a state of character that reduces the role of my rational agency in my action, I am
choosing not to realize my nature as a rational agent any further. But if I choose this in my own interest, I am being
inconsistent; for if I understand my own interest, I must understand my own essence; and if this consists in rational
agency, I am inconsistent if I choose in my own interest not to realize my own essence. The rational person, therefore,
will choose the states of character that involve rational control over his other states and actions.2 The eudaimonic
virtues will be the states that embody this sort of rational control.

200. Virtue, Reason, and Desire
Aristotle sees these connexions between his conception of the human function and the foundations of an account of
eudaimonic virtue. He ﬁrst describes the human function as a life of action of the part of the soul that has reason. He
divides this part into two, one part that obeys reason and the other that has reason and thinks in its own right
(1098a3–5). These two parts reappear in the introduction to the account of virtue (1102b13–1103a3); virtue is
identiﬁed with the harmony in which the non-rational part obeys and agrees with the correct reason in the rational part
(1102b25–8). The virtuous state of character is the one that fully embodies rational agency, by fully expressing the
control of rational desire and deliberation over our choices. In so far as we control our choices in this way, we realize
our essential capacities as responsible rational agents.
Aristotle outlines his general view of virtue of character by describing it as a mean state between excess and deﬁciency
of action and feeling. His interpretation of ‘excess’ and ‘deﬁciency’ makes it clear that he intends to describe
eudaimonic virtue; for the mean states are those that realize the human function by fulﬁlling the capacities of human
nature. Virtues of character resulting from habituation are needed to fulﬁl the human function, because nature does
not infallibly complete itself

CHAPTER 17 § 200

375

(1103a23–6). To complete nature we have to realize our essential capacity of rational determination of human choice
and action.
In contrast to the virtues, ordinary capacities are capacities for contraries (1106a6–11). These are capacities we have in
the weak sense in which we are capable of being either healthy or sick. In this same sense we are capable of being either
virtuous or vicious, and virtue actualizes our capacities no more than vice does. If ‘actualize’ is to be taken in this weak
sense, and if ‘complete’ just means ‘actualize’, then virtue actualizes and completes nature no more than vice does.
In Aristotle's view, however, a doctor has a strong or proximate capacity (potentiality) for, or a capacity primarily for,
healing, and a weak capacity for, or a capacity secondarily for, killing his patients.3 Similarly, a hammer's primary
capacity is for hammering. For organisms, some actualizations complete their natures and others do not, and the ones
that complete their nature correspond to their strong capacities. These are the actualizations that promote and actualize
the capacities essential to organisms of those kinds.
Similarly, Aristotle can fairly argue that some capacities are essential to human beings, and some realizations of these
capacities are essential activities of human beings. These realizations can fairly be taken to complete a human being's
nature. Hence the realization of the capacity for rational direction of actions will complete a human being's nature; and
in so far as virtue realizes this capacity it can claim to complete human nature.
This goal of completing human nature determines the distinctive features of the doctrine of the mean. To achieve the
goal we must determine our human choices and actions by reason. But we should not simply impose some sort of
rational order on them, irrespective of what they are like in themselves, as if they were raw material to be shaped or
discarded as we please. Our material is human choice and action, present in an agent with non-rational as well as
rational desires; and so these non-rational desires and impulses must be properly trained, neither suppressed nor left
alone. If we leave them untrained and unregulated they will tend to dominate us (cf. 1109b1–7), and to distract us from
our essential functions of practical reasoning; but practical reasoning does not try to suppress them.4
The virtuous person, therefore, allows reasonable satisfaction to his appetites; he does not suppress all his fears; he
does not disregard all his feelings of pride or shame or resentment (1126a3–8), or his desire for other people's good
opinion. In the good person the non-rational appetites cooperate with reason, not because they have been forced to be
accomplices in their own suppression but because they recognize that they are being allowed reasonable satisfaction.
Hence the brave person is

376

CHAPTER 17 § 201

appropriately afraid of serious danger (1115b10–20), and if the cause is not worth the danger he withdraws; but when
the cause justiﬁes his standing ﬁrm, his fear is not so strong that he has to struggle against it.5
The Aristotelian virtue of character lies in a mean determined by reason, and by the reason by which the wise person
would determine it (1106b36–1107a2). The virtuous person must decide on the virtuous action for its own sake
(1105a32, 1144a19); but decision rests on wish and deliberation, and correct deliberation is the task of the wise person
(1140a25–31); hence genuine virtue requires wisdom, to order non-rational desires by correct reason (1144b21–5).6 In
requiring wisdom Aristotle requires the virtuous person to realize fully his capacity for rational determination of his
actions and choices. He has described eudaimonic virtue of character, and derived his account from his conception of
the human function.
This general schema of eudaimonic virtue does not yet describe any deﬁnite patterns of choice and action. The
particular Aristotelian virtues of character are the moral virtues recognized by common sense; and if Aristotle fulﬁls
his aim in the Ethics, he will show that they are eudaimonic virtues too.

201. Concern for a Self
Aristotle argues that the virtuous person loves himself, because ‘he acts for the sake of his reasoning part, which is
what each person seems to be’ (1166a16–17). His self-love differs from other people's ‘as much as life in accordance
with reason differs from life in accordance with feeling (pathos)’ (1169a4–5). These claims imply that the person who is
rationally concerned with himself, and whose concern rests on a true conception of himself and his nature as a rational
agent, will practise the virtues.7
The virtuous person is supposed to have the same sort of concern for himself that he has for his virtuous friend. He is
concerned for the friend for the friend's own sake; and this altruistic concern, in Aristotle's view, requires concern for
the friend ‘in himself ’.8 The right sort of concern is concern for the friend as what he essentially is, not simply in so far
as he has some coincidental property that appeals to us (1156a16–19).
Concern for a person's essence seems to Aristotle to require concern for him as having the character he has. In the
best type of friendship,
each wishes good to the other in so far as the other is good; and he is good in himself; and those who wish goods to
a friend for his own sake are friends most of all; for they take this attitude because of himself and not coincidentally.
(1156b8–11)

CHAPTER 17 § 202

377

Aristotle implies that if Al loves Ann for what she is in herself, he loves her for her virtue, and that therefore her
virtuous state of character is intrinsic to what Ann is. If this were not so, then the connexion between Al's loving Ann
for herself, for what she is, and for her virtue, would be unintelligible. Al loves not simply the instance of rational
agency found in Ann, but the particular virtuous states in which it is found.
Aristotle must claim, therefore, that Ann's essence includes her virtuous state of character. It cannot simply include
those properties that make her a human being or a rational agent, but must also include those that distinguish rational
agents with different characters.9 Al's concern for Ann herself includes concern to do what Ann wants; but this counts
as concern for Ann herself only in so far as her desires express her character, and therefore express her essence.
Self-love, therefore, ought also to include concern for one's own essence, and hence for one's own character. The
virtuous person's virtues constitute the character that is himself, and is therefore the proper object of his rational
concern.

202. Self, Essence, and Character
Aristotle, however, seems to assume a closer connexion between a person's essence and his character than we can
readily defend. A particular person is a particular form present in a sequence of bits of matter. The form is the essence
that persists through changes in material composition and in other states; nutrition is a state of a continuing substance
rather than the mere replacement of matter because ‘the form remains’ (cf. GC 322a33).10 Persistence of the particular
form does not require any unchanging shape or size, but a persisting and coherently changing system that absorbs the
matter in goal-directed processes.
The particular form of a rational agent is the ﬁrst actuality that is his soul. If it is like other particular forms, it does not
require the persistence of any determinate state of character, but just the persistence of a coherently changing system
of desires and aims. A particular person's persistence does not consist in the persistence of any particular ﬁrst-order
desires or aims, but in the persistence of the same particular soul that organizes them. The organizing desires are the
agent's conception of his good; but this may change without his ceasing to exist. Even very general desires can be
modiﬁed, sometimes by reﬂexion on their consequences for satisfying lower-order desires that he is strongly attached
to; the persistence of the person does not consist in the ﬁxity even of some very general desires peculiar to him, but in
the continuity and suitable causal connexions between earlier aims and the later

378

CHAPTER 17 § 202

products of their modiﬁcation. The persisting self, therefore, cannot be identical to the character.
Aristotle, however, thinks that the connexions between essence and persistence actually support his claims about
character, friendship, and self. For he insists that virtuous character is persistent and stable (cf. 1100b11–17,
1105a32–3, 1152a30–3), and that therefore this type of friendship is stable also. Such stability is what we expect in a
friendship that involves concern for the person himself (1156b9–12); for since the person himself is stable, genuine
concern for him should be as stable as he is. The lower types of friendship dissolve when the situation changes to
remove the previous pleasure or advantage; but the best type of friendship should dissolve only when one of the
people in it has changed enough to be no longer the same person (1164a8–13, 1165b1–4, 1165b20–31).11
Aristotle therefore suggests that Al appropriately shows concern for the permanent, stable thing that is Ann herself by
loving Ann for her permanent and stable character. Though her character cannot be as persistent as Ann herself, and
therefore cannot be identical to Ann, it is persistent enough to be the appropriate focus of concern for someone
concerned about Ann herself.
This concern for another clariﬁes the virtuous person's concern for herself. My character results from the relatively
stable way in which my rational agency, working through wish and decision, shapes and controls my desires and action.
If I have developed no character at all, I am still a rational agent; but since my conception is unstable, I cannot predict
much about my future desires, and so cannot plan very effectively for the satisfaction of my future self. The less I can
plan for it, the less I can take account of it in my present actions, and the weaker my concern for it will be; I will have
no stable view about whether the aims of my future self are reasonable or unreasonable. If concern for myself is to be
a prominent and effective part of my life, I have reason to form a more stable character; then I will know what to do if
I want to express my concern for my future self.
Aristotle's views about the virtues are therefore closely related to his views on self-concern. A virtue is worth acquiring
partly because it is a ﬁrm and unchanging state (1105a33) that gives us a stable and persisting future self to be
concerned about.
The virtuous person values most of all the expression of rational agency in virtuous action. He is not so concerned
about other goods that in order to get them he is willing to change his state of character for the worse. More of his
traits of character will persist than would persist in an unstable person, and hence he secures his own future good more
than the unstable person does. Particular goods are no part of my good unless

CHAPTER 17 § 203

379

I exist; but the less stable person does not understand this, and so secures the goods, without the right self to possess
them.
It is not simply ignorance that weakens my concern for myself if I lack a stable character; there will also be less to
justify my concern. I am reasonably concerned about my future self to the extent that its plans and decisions will be
continuous with my present ones and will fulﬁl or improve them; and if less of me persists, I have less reason for
concern. Aristotle assumes that an unstable person preserves less of himself than he would if he were virtuous.

203. Self-Love and Self-Realization
Aristotle expects the person with a eudaimonic virtue to be correctly concerned for himself for his own sake, and so to
be concerned for himself as a rational agent.
Hence he wishes goods and apparent goods to himself, and does them in his actions, since it is proper to the good
person to achieve the good. He wishes and does them for his own sake, since he does them for the sake of his
thinking part, and that is what each person seems to be. He wishes himself to live and to be preserved. And he
wishes this for the part by which he has intelligence more than for any other part. For being is a good for the good
person, and each person wishes for goods for himself. (1166a14–20)
He is not in conﬂict with himself (1166a13–14), and he has practically no regret for what he has done (1166a27–9).12
For what he always wants to do most is to exercise his practical reason in rational decision, and he always succeeds in
doing this.
The vicious person ‘is at variance with himself, and has an appetite for one thing and a wish for another, as incontinent
people do’ (1166b7–8). Some vicious people refrain from doing what they think best because of cowardice or laziness
(1166b10–11); and those who have done many terrible actions come to hate being alive, and even kill themselves
(1166b11–13).13 Their conﬂicts appear both at a particular time, when they make a decision, and at a later time, when
they reﬂect on the decision they have made. They are not incontinents who act on appetite against their rational
decision.14 Their rational decisions expose them to the conﬂicts that the virtuous person avoids.
Someone with the proper concern wants to arrange his life so that it allows him scope for exercise of rational agency in
a stable character. He therefore does not want his ultimate end to be a state that is to be achieved by being passively
affected by external conditions and his own non-rational desires. Nor does he want it to be the sort of end that

380

CHAPTER 17 § 203

requires constant change in his character to adapt him to the conditions needed for success. If his goal in life requires
honesty at one time, cheating at another, kindliness now, and cruelty later, it does not secure happiness for him. For in
order to achieve such a goal he has to sacriﬁce some of himself, and relatively little of him will persist into his future
states of character; such a degree of self-sacriﬁce is inconsistent with proper concern for himself.
The vicious person values practical reason only for its efﬁciency in achieving goals that do not essentially involve its
exercise. He must therefore suffer regrets and conﬂicts from which the virtuous person is free. If the virtuous person
chooses to deny himself some pleasure that he rationally prefers to avoid, he does not regret his action, though he may
be sorry that he cannot have the pleasure; for he values for its own sake the exercise of practical reason and the
expression of stable character in that choice. But when the vicious person chooses between his rational plan to rob the
bank and his fear at being caught, he has no reason to prefer the ﬁrst desire as an expression of stable rational agency;
his decision must be based entirely on the comparative strength of his desires, and he regrets the frustration of some of
his desires. Equally he lacks the virtuous person's reason to be pleased and free of regret about his past rational
choices; for since all he cares about is their instrumental efﬁciency, he regrets his actions if things turn out badly.
Similarly, there is no reason why different elements of a vicious person's good should not conﬂict and cause him regret;
he cannot remove the regret by reﬂecting on the rational order that requires the satisfaction of one desire over the
other. He must be equally prepared to pursue his ends even when they require him to perform actions and to develop
traits that previously repelled him and that will come to repel him again in the future. Though he is permanently
vicious, he does not have a stable character. For his permanent aim of pursuing the pleasure at hand will require him
sometimes to be sympathetic to another person, sometimes cruel, sometimes cooperative, sometimes a double-crosser,
sometimes ready to inﬂict severe future pain, sometimes angry at his past indulgence. Aristotle does not exaggerate in
alleging that the vicious person who fails to consider himself as a stable rational agent is liable to hate himself.
If we simply prefer psychic equilibrium over psychic conﬂict, the vicious person may fairly reply that he prefers the
higher level of pleasure and excitement even at the cost of psychic conﬂict.15 But Aristotle does not merely appeal to
this purely conative conception of happiness. Synchronic and diachronic conﬂicts result from the vicious person's
failure to love himself as a rational agent; and this is the condition that Aristotle describes as wretched (1166b26–9).
The vicious

CHAPTER 17 § 204

381

person's distress and inner conﬂict is a symptom of this condition, not itself the proof that he is less happy than the
virtuous person.
The virtuous person's attitude to herself is the norm for correct self-concern, because it rests on a true conception of
herself (1166a10–13). Since Aristotle accepts a normative conception of a person's good, he believes that self-concern
aims at a person's actual good only if it expresses her real nature. While some self-concern seems necessary to
distinguish rational decision from animal desire, the degree of self-concern may be slight and uninformed,
corresponding to the minimal rationality of the intemperate person. The good person has correct concern for herself,
since she is concerned for herself as a rational agent. She cares about herself as a rational agent who has desires for
particular objects, but is not identical to these desires.

204. Rational Control and Self-Regarding Virtues
Aristotle's general remarks about virtue have now allowed us to form a more deﬁnite view of a eudaimonic virtue and
of the way it promotes happiness. (1) A virtue of character is a state promoting and expressing the agent's selfrealization as a rational agent with both rational and non-rational capacities. (2) Rational agency is primary in the
virtuous person's conception of her end; she does not treat rational agency as simply a means to the satisfaction of her
other desires. (3) Concern for herself as a rational agent requires her to cultivate and maintain a stable character, not to
adapt her outlook to be more efﬁcient in the pursuit of other ends.
The later conditions by themselves allow states of character rejected by the ﬁrst condition. I might accord primacy to
rational agency and pay too little attention to any other aspect of my nature; then I would not be aiming at the
realization of myself as a whole. Again, I might develop a highly stable character simply by cultivating irrational and
immovable attachments unaffected by rational judgment, let alone by rational judgment concerned with selfrealization.16 To get the right results we must regard the second and third conditions as partial explanations of the ﬁrst.
The Aristotelian virtues of character are concerned with my relation to my own non-rational desires and impulses, with
my use of external goods, and with my attitude to other people and their interests. Temperance and bravery are
concerned with non-rational desires, generosity and proper pride (the nameless virtue of iv 4) with external goods, and
justice with the interests of other people. However, my attitudes to my non-rational desires and to external goods
will inﬂuence

382

CHAPTER 17 § 204

each other (1121b7–10); and we will see later that all the virtues of character are concerned crucially with the interests
of others.17 The three concerns, then, do not mark a division of labour between different virtues; but they usefully
identify different aspects of a virtue, and the three conditions for a eudaimonic virtue apply to each concern.
Since the other-regarding aspects of moral virtue seem to raise special difﬁculties, it is best to begin with the apparently
self-regarding virtues. For present purposes, we may concentrate on the self-regarding aspects of courage and
temperance. Once we ﬁx the conception of self-realization that makes these eudaimonic virtues, we may also change
our view about the other-regarding virtues.
Even a purely conative conception of happiness seems to support courage and temperance. A rational agent has some
concern for his own good as a whole, distinguished from the satisfaction of this or that immediate desire, because he
has some conception of himself as an agent beyond particular desires. Temperance requires some concern for my
good as a whole in contrast to present pleasures that might distract me from the pursuit of it, and courage requires
such a concern in contrast to present fears that might paralyse my pursuit of it. Even a conative conception of the
good shows why a rational agent values these minimal virtues.
This minimal degree of virtue requires only a slight degree of courage and temperance. For even if I agree that I should
pursue my rational plan for my good as a whole, my rational plan may simply tell me to do whatever I have the
strongest non-rational impulse for. In that case I will not try to modify my desires or to restrain my impulses; for
practical reason has only a tactical role, in planning the satisfaction of a particular desire, with no larger strategic role in
deciding which desires to pursue. This is the condition of the ‘intemperate’ or ‘unrestrained’ (akolastos) person. He acts
on a rational plan, since he acts on a decision, and hence on wish and deliberation; but he sees no point in restraining
his appetites or resisting his fears.18 He will perhaps argue that resistance to appetites or fears causes pain, and that such
pain never results in corresponding beneﬁts. Aristotle needs to show how such a rational plan fails to express the
agent's rational agency, even though it shows that he is a rational agent.
This minimal planner has already conceded a vital point. He has agreed to consider what beneﬁts him in his life as a
whole. He therefore recognizes himself as a rational agent extending over time; but if he recognizes this fact about his
essence, he should not ignore it in considering his good, since his good depends on what he essentially is. Since he is
essentially a rational agent, his good requires the exercise of rational agency; and when he claims that no good could
compensate for

CHAPTER 17 § 205

383

the pain of restraining appetite, he overlooks the beneﬁts that consist in the exercise of rational agency in planning for
his life.
For similar reasons he overestimates the pain involved in the exercise of temperance. The doctrine of the mean shows
that the virtuous person does not have to suffer the sorts of pains that intemperate people will suffer if their appetites
are frustrated; for since her appetites conform to reason, they will not have to be frustrated all the time, and when she
does frustrate them the pain will not be unbearably severe. The same argument applies to bravery. The brave and
temperate person's exercise of rational agency does not cause the pain that intemperate and cowardly people suffer in
restraining their desires. Aristotle rightly remarks that pain at doing the virtuous action is a sign of vice (1104b3–8).

205. Degrees of Rational Control
These objections may refute the utterly intemperate and cowardly person, who rejects any restraint of his appetites at
all. But they will not work so easily against a ‘prudently intemperate’ person who plans rationally to satisfy his bodily
satisfactions over time, and sacriﬁces some gratiﬁcation of his appetites now to gratify more or stronger appetites later.
Similarly, a ‘prudent coward’ will plan to minimize his exposure to danger over time, and will incur minor danger to
avoid greater danger. The prudently vicious person agrees that it is right to use practical reason to order and arrange
the satisfaction of his appetites. He allows this role to practical reason because he regards himself as a persisting
rational agent, and hence thinks his plan is better than the plan of the totally intemperate person. But he allows no role
to practical reason in the choice of the types of ends that are to be pursued; these are to be determined by his nonrational appetites.19
In Aristotle's view, this prudently vicious person cannot justify his restriction of the role of practical reason. Such a
person recognizes that practical reason is competent to judge between different conceptions of the good that require
different proportions of different satisfactions. He needs practical reason to decide whether to pursue these pleasures
at one time or a different set of pleasures at another time. To decide this question, practical reason must form a
conception of his life as a whole and of the relative importance of different pleasures and different degrees of
satisfaction at different times. If practical reason is capable of this, why should it not also be capable of deciding
between bodily appetites and other desires? If practical reason can make these further decisions, the person who is
guided by it will express himself more fully as a rational agent than the prudently vicious person will.

384

CHAPTER 17 § 205

Both the prudently vicious and the utterly vicious person unjustiﬁably limit the scope of practical reason.20 Since the
prudently vicious person allows his non-rational appetites to determine his choice of ends, he must make his character
adaptable enough to pursue those ends efﬁciently; and he must expect that this efﬁcient pursuit will require him to act
in ways that he later ﬁnds repellent. He will be liable to the self-hatred that Aristotle takes to be a sign of disunity and
instability in a self (1166b11–18). Someone who is really concerned with his persistence has reason to reject the selfsacriﬁce imposed on him by prudent vice.
The same objection works against the vices concerned with external goods. These vices require us to take the external
goods as ends to which our rational agency and character are merely instrumental. Sometimes the external goods are
themselves instrumental, and we are attached to them because of our non-rational attachment to the satisfaction of
non-rational desires. That is why a grasping but also wasteful attitude to wealth often results from intemperance
(1121a30–b10); and for similar reasons an intemperate and grasping person will often want to cultivate other people's
favour by ﬂattery (1121b6–7, 1127a8–10). Other vices may result from attachment to an external good for its own
sake; if we want to be honoured or liked by other people, we may take these as ends to which we subordinate our
rational agency.
Aristotle agrees that some level of external goods, and some level of satisfaction of non-rational desires, is genuinely
good; they have a proper place in a life designed by practical reason for self-realization controlled by practical reason.
But excessive attachment to external goods both displays and encourages disregard for one's own stable character. The
person who takes honour as his end will be ready to do anything, no matter how much he disapproves of it, to win
honour from other people; and if others are inconstant in their judgment, he will have to change his character and his
attitudes to suit them. He will have to be equally adaptable if he wants to be liked by others. Such dependence on
others in the pursuit of his general aims easily makes him unstable; if he must always change himself to adapt to
external conditions and other people, he does not leave very much of himself to be the object of his rational concern.
Aristotle can therefore explain why self-realization requires courage, temperance, and the virtues concerned with
external goods, rather than their utterly vicious or prudently vicious rivals. The virtuous person expresses his rational
agency in choosing the ends he pursues and in guiding his actions in accordance with that choice. In subordinating
other ends to his rational agency, he forms a stable self for which he has the proper sort of concern. A true conception
of the good for a human being justiﬁes Aristotle's selection of these states of character as eudaimonic virtues.

CHAPTER 17 § 206

385

206. The Scope of Rational Control
The Aristotelian virtues essentially include the regulation of non-rational desires and external goods by practical
reason. But Aristotle assumes that the virtuous person will exercise rational control ‘in a complete life’.21 We might have
assumed that we fully exercise reason in a ‘minimalist’ plan, reducing our desires and planning for their satisfaction at
the lower level. A minimalist plan might even seem the best for a stable character; the fewer things I aim at, the fewer
conﬂicts I face, and the less adaptation to circumstances is forced on me. Moreover, a higher level of concern for
external goods also makes bravery and temperance more difﬁcult; for more external goods require more hazards and
dangers, hence more situations inspiring fear, and more actions that require some restraint of appetite and inclination.
Aristotle believes a minimalist plan cannot produce a ‘complete life’; for he expects the virtuous person to make more
than minimalist demands on external resources. The temperate person should not reduce his bodily appetites to the
psychologically possible minimum, even if he feels no pains of deprivation; Aristotle condemns ‘insensible’ people,
without suggesting that they suffer pains of frustration (1119a5–11). The temperate person requires more external
goods than the minimum necessary for survival; he wants opportunities for bodily pleasure that require more generous
external resources.
The virtues concerned with external goods also avoid a vice of deﬁciency, by avoiding a stable minimalist plan. If I
refuse to compromise my own views by adapting them to other people's, I might cultivate indifference to honour, and
to other people's opinion. Aristotle's virtuous person, however, rejects these attitudes as vices. The virtuous person is
not so indifferent to honour that he withdraws from competitions for honour altogether. Nor is he indifferent to
wealth; he wants it for the practice of generosity, but also to secure other pleasures and honours. He does not cultivate
such independence of other people's opinions that he never gets angry with them, and never wants to be pleasant to
them; such reduced concern for external goods is a vice of deﬁciency.
To justify the virtuous person's attitude, Aristotle must argue that the external goods are, or are means to, genuine
goods, and that the extent of genuine goods is not determined by the range of a particular person's rational desires. A
rational agent has reason to be concerned with himself as a source of capacities capable of realization; and his good
consists in the realization of his capacities. This normative conception of the good requires external goods, if some
worthwhile capacities cannot be realized without them.
Wealth and honour are resources for the development of someone's

386

CHAPTER 17 § 206

capacities. If I attend only to basic necessities, I am ‘vulgar’ or ‘menial’ (banausos) and slavish; and virtuous people
should have more wealth than this, since surplus wealth is useful for virtuous actions.22 Similarly, a position of trust or
responsibility allows me to extend my interests and realize my capacities in ways I otherwise could not; and to win such
a position I need honour and reputation. If I care about this, I cannot be indifferent to other people's good opinion
of me.
To see that these are worthwhile capacities, I must regard myself as a natural organism with a body and non-rational
mental states. The human form is rational agency in a human rational soul that also includes perceptual and nutritive
capacities. The conditions that make a person ﬂourish as a biological organism and as a creature with sensory and
appetitive states will be among those that a wise person values for his self-realization and the fulﬁlment of his function.
Moreover, the conception of my good that demands more external goods also develops rational agency further. If I
form only the plans that assume a very low level of external goods, I renounce any effort at rational control over my
possession of external goods above that level, and over the activities that depend on possession of more external
goods. My relation to external goods affects my life anyhow; and if I give up efforts to control it above a minimum
level, I contract the scope of my rational agency. Even though my rational control over external goods is incomplete, I
need not leave them to chance. If I plan for more activities and contingencies, and do not meet them with indifference
or resignation, I realize my rational agency further and make more of my life the expression of my rational agency.
It is wrong, therefore, to appeal to the importance of stability as a reason for minimalist plans. If my character
expresses very little of me, then even if it is stable, its stability does not guarantee a stable object of appropriate selfconcern; concern for a stable character that expresses a mere fragment of myself is not proper concern for myself. If
minimalist planners argue against a more expansive plan by appeal to the dangers resulting from it, then they are
moved by fear, not by a correct conception of themselves.
Courage, temperance, and the virtues concerned with external goods all seek the full realization of rational agency in a
human life that is fully controlled by it. The ‘complete life’ that Aristotle demands for a happy person must include a
complete range of human activities under the complete control of practical reason. Such completeness does not mean
that my life must include every possible human activity, or that practical reason must control it entirely. It means that
the activities must include enough to realize the appropriate range of human capacities, and that practical reason must
control them to the full extent that is compatible

CHAPTER 17 § 207

387

with their appropriate range. Though these demands for completeness do not supply an exact criterion, they rule out
minimalist plans.

207. The Defence of Common Beliefs
So far, Aristotle's ethical theory relies on arguments ultimately resting on ﬁrst philosophy, and in particular on his
account of the human essence. To this extent the account of the virtues relies on more than pure dialectic. Still, the
account does not cease to be dialectical; for he tries to explain and justify the most important common beliefs about
the virtues by showing how they should be understood in the light of a true account of a human being's essence and
good.
To conﬁrm this claim it will be useful to list the common beliefs and to remind ourselves of Aristotle's explanation of
them.
1. We believe that virtue is a stable condition of a person, not the sort of thing that we forget or easily change
(1100b11–17). Our belief is justiﬁed because a rational agent has proper self-concern for himself as a stable agent with
relatively ﬁxed states of character, and therefore has reason to cultivate states that are as stable as the virtues are
normally thought to be.
2. We believe in some general way that virtue is distinctively guided by correct reason (1103b31–4). At ﬁrst sight,
correct reason seems no more characteristic of virtue than of prudent, calculating vice that relies on correct
instrumental reasoning. But Aristotle argues that the virtuous person correctly values himself as a rational agent, and
forms his conception of the end by thinking of himself as a rational agent, not a mere instrument for satisfying his
non-rational desires. The virtuous person is therefore distinctively guided by correct reason.
3. We believe that some of the virtues are essentially virtues of character acquired by habituation (1103a14–18). We
might reach this belief by observing the training normally required for a virtue; but Aristotle's theory supports the
belief by appeal to the role of virtue in a rational agent. Habituation is needed because virtue must harmonize a
person's non-rational desires with her rational conception of her ends; and habituation should produce a persistent
habit, because virtue has to be stable and persistent.
4. Aristotle's doctrine of the mean rests on the common and apparently truistic belief that some virtues require us to
strike the right area on a continuum where both excess and deﬁciency are possible (1104a11–27, 1106b5–16). This
seems plausible for the training of such feelings as anger and fear, where some quantitative model seems

388

CHAPTER 17 § 207

suitable, but less plausible as an account of every virtue of character; hence common sense has no name for some of
the mean and extreme states that Aristotle claims to discover (1125b17–18).23 His theory, however, gives a general
reason for thinking that the mean will apply to each virtuous state of character. The virtuous person will not regard his
practical reason as a mere instrument for the satisfaction of other desires, and hence he will avoid the vice of excess.
On the other hand he will not make stability his only aim, and hence he will avoid the vice of deﬁciency.24 That is why
Aristotle can supply more precise instructions for ﬁnding the mean state in cases where common sense cannot identify
one; the precision results from the account of the virtuous person's aim.
5. Common sense sees some connexion between the virtue of F, being a good F, and performing the function of F
(1106a15–24). The connexion is easy to see for artifacts and for things designed or used for a purpose; but if human
virtues simply reﬂect the functions that a human being may be used for (as citizen, soldier, parent, etc.), they will not
thereby realize his nature as human being. Aristotle seeks to show that the virtues of character fulﬁl a person's function
in a stronger sense than the commonsense analogies make clear; for he argues that a human being's essential function
is realized by the virtues of character, because they ‘complete’ us in the right way (1103a23–6). Common sense sees the
connexion between the recognized virtues and functions, and between essential function and eudaimonic virtue;
Aristotle completes common sense by arguing for a connexion between essential function and the recognized virtues.
He argues that the essential human function requires the rational, stable states of character that common sense already
recognizes as virtues of character.
Hence the account of the virtues follows the same line of argument that we found in the account of the good. Aristotle
relies on his metaphysical theory of essence as form and function, and on his psychological theory of the human
function as rational agency; and he uses these theories to organize, explain, defend, and modify common beliefs. In
doing this he shows that his ethical theory is not purely dialectical, but counts as strong dialectic.

18 The Good of Others
208. Altruism and the Moral Virtues
The Aristotelian virtues of character are moral virtues, in so far as they are all concerned with the ﬁne, and therefore
with the good of others. Some virtues, especially friendship and justice, make this concern clear and explicit.1 If these
moral virtues are eudaimonic virtues, Aristotle must show why the rational person will develop the moral virtues.
This task is formidable if we begin with a purely conative account of happiness; for we seem to be able to conceive a
rational agent with a rational plan for his own life that includes no intrinsic concern for the good of others. If his good
just consists in the fulﬁlment of his rational desires, and these need not include any intrinsic concern for the good of
others, the moral virtues are not essential for his good.
Aristotle, however, identiﬁes our good with the realization of our capacities as rational agents, and is therefore free to
claim that a rational agent may fulﬁl a mistaken rational plan that fails to realize his good as a rational agent. He agrees
with the critics of conventional morality who demand to be shown that a moral virtue is also a eudaimonic virtue, and
thinks their demand can be met if we have the right conception of happiness.
If the ﬁnal good is self-sufﬁcient, it must, in Aristotle's view, include the good not only of the agent himself, but also of
family, friends, and fellow-citizens, since a human being is political by nature (EN 1097b8–11). At this stage Aristotle
does not defend his claim that a complete and self-sufﬁcient good must extend beyond the agent. But he does not
forget that it needs defence; for he argues that friends are needed for a self-sufﬁcient life. He recognizes that someone
might argue that since the happy person is self-sufﬁcient, he has no need of friends (1169b3–8). But he replies that the
happy person is self-sufﬁcient, not by being sufﬁcient all by himself, but because he has a complete and self-sufﬁcient
life, which must include friends.
If, then, for the blessedly happy person, being is choiceworthy, since it is naturally good and pleasant, and if the
being of his friend is closely similar to his own, then the friend will also be choiceworthy. Whatever is choiceworthy
for him he must possess, since otherwise he will to that extent lack something. Anyone who is to be happy, then,
must have excellent friends. (1170b14–19)

390

CHAPTER 18 § 209

Aristotle assumes that his normative account of the good justiﬁes his claims about friendship.
This normative account implies that the virtuous person loves herself as she really is, as a rational agent with a stable
character that accords primacy to practical reason in the choice of ends. We tend to think that highly developed selflove will be selﬁsh, and hence that concern for others requires some self-sacriﬁce; but Aristotle argues that we are
wrong, because correct self-love does not allow selﬁshness, and proper concern for others does not require selfsacriﬁce.

209. Friendship and Altruism
The virtuous person's attitude to his virtuous friend is the same as his attitude to himself, since he is his own friend
(1166a1–2, a29–b2). The virtuous person does what he does for his own sake (1166a16), and wishes good to a
virtuous friend for the friend's own sake (1156b7–12), for the sake of the friend himself. We have already discussed the
virtuous person's attitude, in trying to understand his concern for himself. We should now re-examine it, to see why
Aristotle demands it in the best sort of friendship.
The starting-point is dialectical. Aristotle accepts the common belief (phasi) that friendship involves altruism, and active
goodwill, which requires concern for the friend for the friend's own sake (1155b31–4). But in his treatment of the
common belief, he appeals openly and with surprising results to his own metaphysical outlook. In his view, and
contrary to common sense, only the virtuous person takes the attitude proper to genuine and complete (teleia, 1156b7)
friendship. Only the virtuous person is concerned for the friend for the friend's own sake, because only he is
concerned for the friend ‘in himself ’ (kath'hauton; cf. 1156a10–11), ‘because of himself ’ (di'hauton, 1156b10), and ‘in so
far as he is who he is’ (1156a17–18).2
We might be surprised at this intrusion of Aristotelian metaphysics into the apparently straightforward commonsense
demand for altruism. Aristotle understands ‘for his own sake’ with the emphasis on ‘his own’ so that it means ‘for the
sake of his essence’. But we might think we have properly altruistic concern if we simply count the other person's own
desire for some good as providing a reason in itself, apart from any self-conﬁned concern of ours, for trying to get that
good for him. This commonsense understanding of ‘for his own sake’ is a form of ‘simple altruism’ that implies none
of the Aristotelian metaphysics of essence and coincident; and we might conclude that the ‘metaphysical altruism’
described by Aristotle is a gratuitous addition.3

CHAPTER 18 § 210

391

If, on the other hand, simple altruism is focused on the other person's desires, it may not be the right sort of concern.
Even a purely conative account of a person's good challenges simple altruism. If Al thinks of himself as a temporally
extended rational agent for whom he has rational concern, Ann's simple altruism towards him may be bad for him; for
if she simply tries to get him what he wants, she may get him something that he ought to refuse if he considered his
other desires more carefully. If Ann is really concerned for Al's interest, she will need more than simple altruism; she
must distinguish the desires that express the interest of Al himself from those that do not.
Aristotle has a still stronger argument against simple altruism, since he rejects a purely conative account of the good,
and argues that a person's good is determined by his function and essence, by the sort of being he essentially is. Our
altruistic actions will be morally reliable only if they are informed by metaphysical altruism. If friendship should be
concerned with the friend himself and with his own good, we have no escape from metaphysical altruism.
Aristotle regards a stable character as the appropriate object of a rational person's concern for her continuing self; and
similarly, the best kind of friendship, expressing concern for the other person herself, must include concern for her
character. If she had no stable character, our concern for her would have to be rather generalized and indeterminate.
We could assume very little about her future desires, and therefore we could do very little to promote their satisfaction;
we would be restricted to some very general concern for the sorts of resources that might be necessary for every
rational agent. Such generalized concern hardly supports the speciﬁc concern for a particular person's aims that we
expect in friendship. Concern that ignores a person's character is not clearly concern for the person himself, and, as
Aristotle says, it is friendship with that particular person only coincidentally. Metaphysics is needed to tell us what the
person himself is, and hence to tell us what attitude is appropriate for genuine friendship.

210. Self-Love and Altruism
Aristotle must justify the extension of the virtuous person's self-love to someone else.4 He argues that the right sort of
self-love requires love for a friend because the friend is another self.
The excellent person is related to his friend in the same way as he is related to himself, since a friend is another self;
and therefore, just as his own being is choiceworthy for him, the friend's being is choiceworthy for him in the same
or a similar way. We agreed that someone's own being is choiceworthy because he

392

CHAPTER 18 § 210

perceives that he is good, and this sort of perception is pleasant in itself. He must, then, perceive his friend's being
〈together with his own〉, and he will do this if they live together and share rational discourse (logos) and thought.
For in the case of human beings, living together seems to consist in this sharing of rational discourse and thought,
and not, as in the case of grazing animals, in sharing the same pasture. (1170b5–14)
Being ‘another self ’ is distinctive of friendship, as opposed to mutual admiration or goodwill; but what does it involve?5
Rational discourse and thought are characteristic of the shared life of the best type of friends, because each loves the
other for what he essentially is, and each of them is essentially his reasoning and thinking part. My thought and
deliberation belong to myself in so far as they are connected with each other in the structure of wish, deliberation, and
decision that expresses my conception of happiness. My actions belong to myself in so far as they are the products (and
also to some extent the causes) of the same structure of wish, deliberation, and decision.
In so far as I treat my friend as I treat myself, my reasoning and thinking are related to his reasoning, thinking, and
action in the same way as they are related to mine. We share the same goals and the same conception of happiness,
since each of us wants the good of the other as part of his own good; we cooperate in deliberation, decision, and
action; and the thoughts and actions of each provide reasons for the future thoughts and actions of the other.
Aristotle claims that this mutual attitude of friends involves concord and goodwill. Concord requires friends to share
the same views on important questions about beneﬁt and harm (1167b4–9). Since the good person is in concord with
himself, and he regards his friend as another self, he will also be in concord with his friend. Concord does not imply
that two virtuous friends will immediately give the same answer when asked, or that each will automatically defer to the
other; for this is not the good person's attitude to himself either. Concord implies an extra participant in rational
deliberation, and hence further considerations to take into account; it does not involve conﬂict or compromise
between competing interests.
Goodwill explains why there is no competition in a friendship between virtuous people. The virtuous person is
concerned with the friend's good for the friend's own sake; if Al is Ann's friend, he wishes good to Ann for Ann's own
sake, not just as a means to his own good (1167a10–14; cf. 1155b31–4). Al cares about himself for his own sake, not
merely as a means to anyone else's interest; and so he sees that the same treatment of Ann will involve caring about her
for her own sake, since she is another rational agent who counts for Al in the way Al counts for himself.

CHAPTER 18 § 211

393

Once we agree with Aristotle that friendship requires goodwill and concord, and that the virtuous person has friends,
we can agree that self-love and altruism do not necessarily conﬂict as they are popularly supposed to (ix 8). The
virtuous person values himself as a rational agent; hence he values his own rational plans and choices; these include
other-regarding plans and choices; hence the fulﬁlment of his self-love requires concern for others.

211. The Defence of Friendship
We may grant, then, that if the virtuous person is rationally justiﬁed in having friends, his concern for them is part of
the virtuous action that is a part of his happiness. But why should we grant the antecedent of the conditional? Aristotle
suggests that it is choiceworthy (haireton) for me to be aware of my friend's actions, in the same way as it is for me to be
aware of my own. But why is it more choiceworthy to be aware of his actions than simply to be aware of my own?6
Aristotle argues that a human life of conscious perception and thought is good and pleasant in itself for a human being,
and will seem so to a virtuous person. If Al treats Ann as another Al, then Ann's perception and thought will be as
good and pleasant as Al's own perception and thought are to Al (1170b5–10). A rational agent with the correct selfconcern chooses to realize himself as a rational agent; he prefers more self-realization to less. If Al has Ann as a friend,
and cares about Ann for her own sake, just as he cares about himself, then Al will realize himself more fully than if he
had no friend; hence friendship will be part of his good.
If Al is virtuous, he is concerned with himself as a rational agent, and values his states of character as expressions of his
rational agency. He has reason to take the same attitude to Ann's states of character, if he can regard them as
expressions of his rational agency. Friends share rational activity; and the resulting concord in rational deliberation and
decision ensures that each friend's deliberation will affect the actions of the other and the joint actions of both. In so
far as Al realizes more capacities as a rational agent in this friendship with Ann, he has reason to recognize this
friendship as part of his good.
Friendship promotes self-realization through the different causal roles of friends. Ann's (Al's) help may allow Al (Ann)
to do something he (she) could not otherwise have done (if, e.g., Ann (Al) thinks of a way for him (her) to realize his
(her) ambition to sail across the Atlantic). On other occasions their mutual aid may help both of them to do together
something that neither of them could have done separately. Aristotle

394

CHAPTER 18 § 211

notices these different functions of friends when he remarks that our friends allow us to be more continuously active;
to develop virtue (1170a4–13); and to act in cooperation (1171b29–1172a8). In each of these ways friendship allows
the realization of capacities that would otherwise be unrealized. Al can value what Ann does because he regards Ann as
another Al, and Ann's actions realize his own rational agency.
Friendship most fully promotes self-realization if and only if Al wishes Ann's good for Ann's own sake; for then he has
many opportunities for rational action, in the goals and interests he would otherwise lack. If he cares only about his
own condition, he will not care if Ann breaks her leg, unless that results in some further harm for him; and so he will
not care about helping her when she is hurt or about helping her to avoid doing it. These areas of rational activity will
be of no interest to him. If he cares about her for her own sake, he will want to cooperate with her on occasions that
would otherwise be indifferent to him. If he wants her part of a joint enterprise to succeed, he will do more than he
would have been willing to do if his concern had been self-conﬁned. Someone who can form the best type of
friendship opens for himself occasions for self-realization that would otherwise be closed to him.
This friendship must involve virtuous people. For they will be reliably and correctly concerned for themselves as
rational agents, and therefore will see the possibilities of self-realization opened in the best friendship. They will not be
tempted by false notions about their good to betray a friend, or to exploit her without regard for her interest, for some
beneﬁt to themselves. When each friend knows this about the character of the other, suspicion or caution will not
prevent joint activities that realize the capacities of each. Moreover, if each is virtuous, they will decide and act in
concord, on the same projects; they will not waste their time in antagonism, conﬂict, and compromise.
The cooperative aspects of the best kind of friendship promote self-realization by forming a complete life. Aristotle
claims that without this friendship our lives are not complete and self-sufﬁcient (1169b3–10, 1170b14–19); and the
reasons for demanding external goods are equally good reasons for requiring friendship. We explained why each of the
apparently self-regarding virtues is a eudaimonic virtue, by showing why it is part of a complete life for a rational agent.
When we saw what such a life requires, we could see why the virtuous person is justiﬁed in pursuing a way of life that
makes more than the minimal demands for external goods.7 By planning for the use of external goods he extends his
rational control into areas that otherwise he would leave uncontrolled by his rational agency. Though rational agency
cannot guarantee the supply of these external goods, it is still reasonable to plan for their

CHAPTER 18 § 212

395

use. The best kind of friendship is reasonable in the same way, since it extends the aspects of our lives that are subject
to control by practical reason.
In Aristotle's view many aspects of my welfare are subject to fortune and external conditions, because there are
genuine goods that I cannot control by practical reason. Cooperation makes some of these subject to our joint efforts.
I need not rely on chance or mutual advantage to ﬁnd ﬁnancial aid if I have bad luck. The service provided by a friend
is good for me not simply because it provides me with something I want, but also because it allows me to count on
having the material resources I need, and therefore allows me to make rational plans for aspects of my life that I would
otherwise have to leave to chance. For these purposes it does not matter if in fact chance is favourable (1169b7–8); I
still have a reason to want to control those aspects of my life, as far as I can, by rational agency, and hence I have
reason to want virtuous friends.

212. The Friend as Another Self
These beneﬁts of friendship are relevant, however, only if we can reasonably regard friends as other selves. Aristotle
argues that Al will enjoy and value Ann's rational activity of perception and thought as he values and enjoys his own;
but how is this possible? Aristotle answers that if Al can regard Ann as another Al, he has no reason not to take the
same pleasure in Ann's activities as he takes in his own. His valuing of Al's activities is valuing of those activities as
done by Al; and so when they are done by Ann, another Al, Al also values them as Al's activities.
Can Al justiﬁably regard Ann as another Al in the strong sense that is needed for the conclusion? We might argue that
‘Al’ is a proper name with a singular reference to one particular—Al himself—and not shorthand for a deﬁnite
description designating a shareable set of properties—'person with Al-type characteristics'. If we understand that Al is
the particular referent of the proper name ‘Al’, then Ann cannot be in any strict sense another Al. In calling Ann
another Al, Al perhaps means nothing more than that he shows to her the goodwill he shows to himself; and surely
this falls some way short of the conclusion Aristotle needs.
We might say, for instance, that Al is the human essence as instantiated in this piece of matter, from this egg and
sperm, born at this time, and so on; but this conception of particular substances and their essences is inadequate.
Continuous human functioning in the same bit of remote matter is not sufﬁcient for the persistence of the same
human being, if his traits of character become too radically and suddenly

396

CHAPTER 18 § 212

different. A person's essence has to consist in the traits of character that are his determinate ways of embodying
rational agency. But these determinate traits are logically repeatable; we might ﬁnd a Socrates in two different bits of
matter.8
Once we recognize distinct essences corresponding to different people with different character-traits, we still need not
say that ‘Socrates’ is simply the name of a universal, of determinate traits that are embodied in the son of Sophroniscus
but can logically belong to several Socrateses. We can say that only one Socrates is logically possible, because Socrates
must have not only the traits that are Socratic, but also a deﬁnite spatio-temporal position, associating him with one
piece of matter as opposed to others.
If Al loves himself, he does not value simply his spatio-temporal uniqueness; and he does not attend simply to the
rational agency that he shares with other human beings. He loves himself as the agent who has developed human
capacities in this determinate way to form these determinate states of character. If he is a virtuous person Al does not
love his character for its idiosyncrasies; the fact that it is different from anyone else's because of his particular tastes
and circumstances is not in itself a reason for loving or valuing it. Al loves himself since he loves his character as a
particular correct way of realizing human capacities in rational agency.
Al's friend Ann is not another Al in the way that a clone of Al might be. She has her own idiosyncrasies that are
different from Al's. But Al can still regard her as another Al in so far as she has the same correct realization of the
human capacities that results in virtuous traits of character. Ann is another Al in so far as she has what Al loves about
himself; these virtues are necessary, though not sufﬁcient, for Al's being the person he is. Al sees in Ann the traits of
character of the very same type as those that justify him in loving himself. To be another Al Ann need not be a replica
of Al; she simply needs to replicate him far enough to have traits with the properties that make Al's traits lovable to
himself. Al's traits are formed by his own deliberation and decision; and when Al and Ann are friends, each contributes
in the same way to forming the traits of the other. They have the same reasons for loving each other that they have for
loving themselves.9
We have appealed, then, to the connexion Aristotle sees between a person's good and the exercise of practical reason.
From this we can see how he justiﬁes the best type of friendship as a component of a rational agent's happiness, and
why he insists so strongly on a common life, and on shared rational agency, as a crucial part of such a friendship.
Aristotle can defend himself, not merely from common sense, but from his general views about the human essence
and rational agency. Hence this

CHAPTER 18 § 213

397

crucial element of Aristotelian ethics can be defended as part of a systematic moral theory resting on metaphysical and
psychological support. Here we are not inventing a defence for Aristotle. In his account of friendship he sees that we
must consider it ‘from the point of view of nature’ (1167b29, 1170a13). He relies on claims about human nature and
about realization of capacities; and we have seen that these claims are crucial in his normative conception of the good
and of happiness.

213. Extended Altruism and the Moral Virtues
The friendship of virtuous people requires highly developed altruistic concerns; but the concerns extend to very few
people. We may think that the sort of altruism required by justice and the other virtues of character is so different from
the sort required by friendship that we need a different account for these other virtues. Aristotle, however, seems to
offer no defence of the other-regarding aspects of the virtues beyond the defence of friendship; and so he seems to
face a serious difﬁculty in justifying them.
The case of justice shows how serious the difﬁculty is. For Aristotle accepts the general view, stated by Thrasymachus
in the Republic, that justice is another's good (Rep. 343c3–5). He must reject Thrasymachus' further point, that justice is
harmful to the just agent. For if justice is a genuine virtue, the just person must choose just action for its own sake; and
since the fully just person is also wise, the wise person must choose just action for its own sake. The wise person
deliberates well, so that he reaches a true conception of his happiness, and of the actions that achieve it; if justice is a
virtue he must include just action as the sort of action in which his happiness consists. If justice essentially beneﬁts
others, the wise person must believe that beneﬁting others is a good in itself that partly constitutes his happiness.
Aristotle's theory does not explain why the wise person will believe this about justice, unless his defence of friendship
suggests an explanation of the extended altruism needed for justice. Extended altruism will be intelligible if the reasons
that justify the concerns of friendship also justify the wider concerns of justice and the other virtues.

214. The Extension of Friendship
The best type of friendship holds only between a few, highly selected, and untypical people. Aristotle insists very
strongly that it must be a

398

CHAPTER 18 § 214

relation between only a few people who are all virtuous, who know each other well, and who can spend a good part of
their lives in shared activities (ix 10). This sort of friendship is contrasted with ‘political friendship’, the friendship for
fellow-citizens, which we can have for many people; ‘because of virtue and because of themselves it is not possible
towards many, and we must be satisﬁed to ﬁnd even a few with such characters’ (1171a19–20).
If political friendship is to support justice, it must extend beyond the limited circle of complete friends.10 On the other
hand, it must be distinguished from the general attitude of mere goodwill, which we can feel to others with no desire to
help them or to put ourselves out for them (1167a7–10). Such goodwill cannot support political friendship and justice;
for these require the positive desire to help that need not result from mere goodwill.
If political friendship supports the just person's concern for just action for its own sake, it must involve concern for
the friend for the friend's own sake. Only complete friendship seems to justify such intrinsic concern for the other; and
political friendship cannot be complete friendship. Still, complete friendship may help us to understand the basis of the
intrinsic concern found in other relations. For some of the features of complete friendship are present in other
relations to a degree that justiﬁes the sort of intrinsic concern that Aristotle assumes.
The ﬁrst reason for believing that complete friendship may help to explain other friendships appears in Aristotle's
account of friendship within families. The child counts as his parent's ‘other self ’ because of their family connexion
(1161b27–9). Since the child is the parent's other self, the parent is intrinsically concerned with the child's welfare, not
simply with the parent's own pleasure or advantage (1159a28–33, 1166a2–6). These are the attitudes characteristic of
the best friendship between virtuous people.
The parent and child bound by such ties, however, need not be virtuous people. The virtuous friend is ‘another self ’
because he is a virtuous person, sharing the aims and pleasures of his friend because they are both virtuous. The child,
by contrast, is another self, and therefore a proper object of intrinsic concern, because he is dependent on the parent
and his character is formed by the parent, expressing the parent's own aims. It follows that intrinsic concern for
another person does not presuppose that she is virtuous.11 A parent extends himself and the scope of his practical
reason through his relation to his child; and for this reason his natural attachment to the child produces an element of
his own good.
Friendship is extended in another direction, through a ‘nameless’ virtue of character that is similar to friendship, but
lacks the right affective features (1126b20–5). (Let us call it ‘friendliness’.) This virtue

CHAPTER 18 § 215

399

resembles the best kind of friendship, in so far as the friendly person does what is expected of a virtuous friend, and
his attitude to others does not rest on consideration of his own pleasure or advantage. Aristotle does not explain this
attitude; but the account of complete friendship may explain it.
Friendliness is displayed in social intercourse and common life (1126b11–12), to all fellow-citizens, whether or not they
happen to be friends or relatives or acquaintances (1126b25–8). A fellow-citizen may not be a virtuous person, and
therefore may not be another self in the way one virtuous person is for another. Nor does the virtuous person share
his life with a mere fellow-citizen to the extent he shares it with a virtuous friend. But if the fellow-citizen is virtuous
enough to share some similar aims, the virtuous person can extend his practical reason in the same way as with a
virtuous friend.
The basis of the best friendship is the virtuous person's ability to take the sort of interest in someone else that allows
him to extend his own concerns, and so to realize capacities that would otherwise be left unrealized. In the best kind of
friendship Al knows Ann well, knows what she wants, knows she is virtuous, knows that she knows about him what he
knows about her, and knows that she has the same desire for his welfare that he has for hers. All these facts make it
easy for each to have intrinsic concern for the other, and make the extent of the concern necessarily wider than in
other cases; the more Al knows about what Ann wants and the more he agrees with it, the more he will want to do for
her; and his concern for Bert, whom he sees on the bus each day, or for Curt, who occasionally passes him in the
street, will be narrower.
Still, the reasons that allow Al to be concerned about Ann may also apply to Bert and Curt to some extent. If Al knows
that they are virtuous people and shares their virtuous aims, knows of ways to cooperate with them, and can share in
their deliberation, then he has reason to be interested in their aims as in his own. Since their aims are virtuous, he
approves of them, and can affect them by his own rational planning and deliberation. If they all know this about each
other, they will be able to make plans and enter cooperative schemes that would be too risky if each believed that
neither of the others had any intrinsic concern for the welfare of each of the others.

215. The Political Community and the Human Good
To understand the extension of altruistic concern that results in justice, we must now consider the distinctive role that
Aristotle attributes to the polis, the political community. For the primary concern of justice is the

400

CHAPTER 18 § 215

good of the political community (1129b17–19); and if rational agents have good reason to be concerned about the
good of the political community, they have good reason to extend their altruistic concern in the particular direction
that leads to justice and to the choice of just action for its own sake.
The Ethics identiﬁes the ﬁnal good as the object of the supreme science, the end that includes the ends of the other
sciences; and political science has the all-inclusive end because it prescribes the proper pursuit of all the other sciences
(1094a26–b7). The Politics claims that the most controlling and all-inclusive community aims at the most controlling
good (1252a1–6), which is the ﬁnal good, happiness. The city is the all-inclusive community, of which the other
communities are parts, since it aims at advantage not merely for some present concern but for the whole of life (EN
1160a9–30). Since happiness is complete and self-sufﬁcient, the city is a ‘complete community’ (Pol. 1252b28) aiming
at a complete and self-sufﬁcient life (1252b27–30, 1280b29–35). It is self-sufﬁcient in so far as it includes all the goods
that are needed for a happy life (1256b2–10, 26–39, 1257a28–30, 1326b2–11).12 It is ‘a particular kind of community of
similar people, for the sake of the best possible life’ (1328a35–7).13
Aristotle argues for the completeness of the city by presenting it as the natural goal and completion of the smaller
human communities. He compares the city to the full-grown plant or animal that is the goal of its earlier stages
(1252b30–4); and so he supports his view that a human being is naturally political (1253a1–7). Though people need
not have had any conscious conception of their happiness, their inarticulate search for happiness has rightly led them
to form cities (1252a26–34, b15–16, 27–30). The initial motive for more than a temporary union is safety (1252a30–1);
concern for more than short-term interest leads to the village (1252b16); and the desire for happiness leads eventually
to the city that is formed for the sake of living, but remains in being for the sake of living well (1252b29–30,
1278b20–5).
The analogy with natural growth is useful only within limits. We might agree that the mature oak is the natural
completion of the acorn and the sapling, because it gets no bigger than its mature, natural size. Aristotle cannot use
this argument, since he admits that the city is not the largest community.14 He might argue that an animal may grow
beyond its natural size; if we say it is too big, we have some conception of the proper functions and activities that are
the ﬁnal cause of normal growth and are impeded by excessive growth (1256b31–9, 1326b2–11).15
If Aristotle appeals to this conception of natural growth, he must identify the appropriate functions and activities of
the city, and show

CHAPTER 18 § 215

401

that these complete human happiness, so that no further community supplies a further part of happiness.16 He relies on
his conclusion in the Ethics, that human happiness requires the sorts of activities that fully realize human capacities; he
should show why the city, not some narrower or wider community, realizes them.
He repeats his claim in the Ethics that a human being is naturally political (EN 1097b8–11, 1169b16–19), but now gives
a new reason, that a human being is the only animal capable of rational discourse.17 Other animals have voice, which is
a sign of what is pleasant or painful (Pol. 1253a8–12):
for their nature has gone as far as having perception of what is pleasant or painful and of signifying this to each
other. But rational discourse is for making clear what is expedient or harmful, and hence what is just or unjust. For
this is special to human beings in comparison with the other animals, that they are the only ones with a perception
of good and evil, and of just and unjust, and so on; and it is community in these that produces a household and a
city. (1253a12–18)18
Aristotle claims that awareness of good and evil is an essential capacity of a human being, and hence that the
realization of this capacity is part of a human being's good; but why would rational communication between enemies
and rivals not be a sufﬁcient realization of the capacity? Aristotle needs to show that a human being's essential
capacities are fully realized only in cooperative communication about what is beneﬁcial and just.
The good of complete friendship with another virtuous person consists in awareness of his virtuous life and character,
which requires living together and sharing rational discourse and thought (EN 1170b10–14).19 The Politics suggests that
the rational discourse and thought should be about what is beneﬁcial and just; such communication essentially
contributes to the virtuous person's self-realization, because it extends the scope of his practical reason and
deliberation beyond his own life and activities.
Each of the communities Aristotle considers is more comprehensive than the previous one. A marriage is ‘for every
day’ (Pol. 1252b13), and a village is formed for ‘intercourse for more than a day’ (1252b16).20 Marriage is characteristic
of human beings, because it includes communication about the beneﬁcial and just; unlike animals that simply mate
with the unconscious end of reproduction (1252a26–30), human beings have foresight (1252a31–2), and consider the
rest of their lives (EN 1162a19–24). The village is more comprehensive than the house-hold, both in time and in
scope; it is not limited by the lifetime of individuals, and it can make plans that would be pointless for

402

CHAPTER 18 § 216

individuals or temporary associations. Since the city is comprehensive, seeking to plan for everything that is needed for
the complete good, a rational agent has good reason to want to share in its deliberations.
This argument implies that a virtuous person does not value the city simply because of its general concern with the
expedient (cf. EN 1160a9–14). Aristotle suggests that essentially political activities are themselves part of the complete
and happy life. If the city provides only the instrumental resources needed for a complete and happy life, it is not clear
why the virtuous person values just action for its own sake.21 Aristotle's explanation of the good of friendship allows
him the sort of argument he needs for the intrinsic goodness of essentially political activity.

216. Political Activity
It is important to decide whether or not this is Aristotle's consistent view in the Politics. If he ascribes intrinsic value to
political activities, then some institutional and constitutional arrangements that might seem to raise only questions of
efﬁciency will in fact be open to another kind of evaluation. We might think that in deciding how many citizens should
take what sort of part in government, we need only consider the instrumental function of one or another arrangement,
and need only ask how efﬁciently it secures some beneﬁt that is its causal result. But if a particular sort of political
activity is itself part of the human good, then the argument for its presence in a city cannot be purely instrumental, and
we need not, and should not, defend it on purely instrumental grounds.
Aristotle argues against a restricted instrumental function for the state—safety, or mutual protection, or the
safeguarding of what justly belongs to each person (cf. 1280b8–23). These aims might explain an association ‘for the
sake of staying alive’; but they do not explain why there should be a permanent association for the sake of living well.
For ‘even when they have no need of help from each other they nonetheless want to live together’ (1278b20–1). Living
together (suzên) is to be valued for itself, apart from any instrumental beneﬁt; and if this claim is to be relevant to the
city, the city's speciﬁc form of living together and sharing in reason and thought must be intrinsically valuable.
The end of the city cannot be simply living together. Friendship is ‘the decision to live together’ (1280b38–9), and we
can live together by forming groups smaller than a city (1280b36–9).
The end of the city, then, is living well, and these 〈smaller associations〉 are for the sake of the end. A city is the
association of families and villages in a complete

CHAPTER 18 § 216

403

and self-sufﬁcient life. And this, we say, is living happily and ﬁnely. Hence we must take the political association to
be for the sake of ﬁne actions, and not for the sake of living together. (1280b39–1281a4)
‘Living together’ has different roles in different stages of this argument. First (1278b20–1) Aristotle points to living
together to show that the state has more than a protective role. Later (1280b39–1281a4) he argues for an extended
function for the city, by arguing that it cannot be conﬁned to living together. His claims are consistent if we distinguish
living together in general, which is secured by the smaller associations, from the particular form of living together that
requires the political association.
This second form of living together involves sharing in deliberation and choice about the beneﬁcial and the just; and in
so far as this shared activity is essential to the city, a more restricted conception of its function cannot be correct. When
Aristotle, therefore, contrasts ﬁne actions with living together, he ought to say that he contrasts one form of living
together with another. He claims that living together in the smaller communities aims at happiness, and so aims at the
complete community that is the city (1280b39–40).22
The view that political activity is merely instrumental to ﬁne actions conﬂicts with Aristotle's argument for treating
some people as parts of the city and excluding others.
But in fact the city is not for the sake of simply living, but for living well. For otherwise slaves and the other animals
could belong to a city, whereas in fact they do not, because they have no share in happiness or in living in
accordance with decision. (1280a31–4)
Instrumental means to happiness are not parts of the life of the city, and those wholly concerned with them are, to that
extent, not parts of the city.23
This argument would be unconvincing if the city simply provided resources for living well; in that case anyone who
could contribute efﬁciently to the provision of these resources would have a claim to membership in the city. Aristotle's
argument for the exclusion of slaves and animals does not claim that they are useless to the city. Their inability to live
according to decision incapacitates them for happiness; and if this is a ground for excluding them from political
activity, Aristotle must assume that political activity itself is part of happiness.
Aristotle conﬁrms this in Book vii, in his description of the ideal state.
The citizens must live neither a menial nor a commercial life; for such a life is base, and contrary to virtue. Nor
must those who are to be citizens be farmers; for they need leisure both to develop virtue and to perform political
actions. (1328b39–1329a2)

404

CHAPTER 18 § 217

If political actions themselves were purely instrumental to some further goal, a life including them would be unleisured,
and so inappropriate for the citizen of the ideal state. In requiring a life suitable for the practice of virtue and political
action, Aristotle must assume that such a life includes constituents of happiness within itself. The sort of work that is
dismissed as ignoble is the sort that does not require the exercise of virtue (1258b38–9), whereas the life that exercises
the virtues in political activity is taken to realize the agent's good.
In describing the political life Aristotle assumes that the good depends on free cooperation of equal citizens in ruling
each other (1325b3–14); this achieves the common happiness that is the aim of the community (1325a7–10,
1328a35–7). The attitude displayed here is characteristic of friends who care about the welfare of each other for their
own sake; and the value of friendship explains the value of the citizen's life. Friends exercise their virtue in activity: ‘for
happiness is action, and moreover the actions of just and temperate people possess the end of many and ﬁne things’
(1325a32–4). In speaking of these actions as ﬁne, and therefore good in themselves, Aristotle assumes that they
achieve happiness non-instrumentally.24

217. The Complete Community
If we have correctly understood this line of argument about the value of political activity, we will better understand
Aristotle's further, and initially surprising, claim that the city is naturally prior to the individual just as the whole is prior
to the parts; the parts are no longer what they were (e.g. hand, foot), except homonymously, once they are severed
from the whole (1253a18–29). This claim about homonymy cannot be taken seriously for human beings, if it is
supposed to imply that a person who is severed from a city or from his city is no longer the same person, no longer
even a human being, except homonymously.
In support of his claim, however, Aristotle urges two weaker claims. First he says I am not self-sufﬁcient in a separated
condition (1253a26–7), but this claim cannot be true if ‘self-sufﬁcient’ means just ‘capable of survival’; for Aristotle
knows that human beings can survive in smaller communities than cities. His claim is reasonable, however, if ‘selfsufﬁcient’ means ‘achieving my complete and self-sufﬁcient good’; the city is necessary not for our survival, but for our
happiness.25 The second claim modiﬁes the initial suggestion in the same way: ‘Someone who is not capable of
association, or because he is self-sufﬁcient has no need of it, is no part of a city, so that he is either a beast or a god’
(1253a27–9). A human being's nature, on this view, involves a capacity to belong to a city, not actually belonging
to one.26

CHAPTER 18 § 217

405

To defend this claim Aristotle will appeal again to his conception of human nature, and to the unique role of the city in
fulﬁlling a human being's capacities. The weaker claims in this passage rest ﬁrmly on Aristotle's ethical theory, which
rests on strong dialectic; but any strict analogy with other wholes and parts rests on an exaggeration that becomes clear
once we examine Aristotle's own arguments. He is capable of misusing the conclusions of his own theory; but once the
misuse is discounted, the theory still proves something important.
Aristotle, therefore, draws heavily on strong dialectic in his argument to show that the city is the complete community
achieving the complete human good. His claims about its speciﬁc role in the realization of human capacities support
his conception of the citizen and the qualiﬁcations for membership in the city. He argues that political activity is part of
a human being's good, not merely instrumental to it, because it realizes the same capacities of rational agency that are
realized in friendship. If we are persuaded that friendship is a desirable extension of rational agency, we should be
persuaded that the city offers a further desirable extension.
The comprehensive character of the city gives a virtuous person reason to value it for its own sake, not simply because
it is useful to him for other aims he already has. It extends the scope of practical reason and deliberation, as friendships
do. Without the city I have to leave many aspects of my life to chance and external circumstances, since they will be out
of my rational control. Protagoras indicated the dominance of chance over rational agency by remarking that we would
be the prey of wild beasts (Plato, Pr. 322a8–b8). In Aristotle's view of the human good, this exposure to chance is not
merely inconvenient, but a positive frustration of the rational agency characteristic of a human being. The virtuous
person has reason to value the extension of rational agency in the city for its own sake, not simply because it allows
him to plan more efﬁciently. He has the same reason to share in the deliberations of the city, not simply to take its
beneﬁts passively for granted; for what he values is not simply the services provided by the city, but the practical reason
that is exercised in providing them.
This same comprehensive character of the city gives its virtuous citizens reason for intrinsic concern for each other. A
virtuous person has reason to regard another virtuous person as another self in so far as he extends his own concerns
and self-realization by sharing the virtuous aims of the other. If I know another person is a virtuous fellow-citizen, I
know, without knowing anything else about him, that I have reason to regard him as another self; for I know that I
share with him the virtuous aim of maintaining the comprehensive community of the city. In a friendship each of us
cares about the other for his own sake, not just for his contribution to the good of the city; but our shared concern
for the

406

CHAPTER 18 § 217

city gives each of us a reason for intrinsic concern for the other. The relation between fellow-citizens expresses, instead
of simply facilitating, the extended concern and interest that realizes each person's capacities. That is why relations
within a city are a part of each person's happiness, and not simply a means to it.27
Aristotle, therefore, can explain why a virtuous person with a true conception of his own happiness will also be just. To
be just he must decide to do just actions for their own sake, because they are just, and not for some coincidental
feature of them. The actions are just in so far as they beneﬁt the community; the virtuous person is intrinsically
concerned with action for the beneﬁt of the community; and therefore he will be intrinsically concerned to do just
actions. He will also be intrinsically concerned for the good of the other people who are beneﬁted by the just actions;
and for this reason too he will choose the just actions for their own sake. A city is not the only community whose
members will see reason to do the actions that a just person does; but the city and the other communities resting on
similar altruistic concerns will be the only ones in which people see reason to be just.28
The extension of altruistic concern to justice relies on the assumptions about rational agency that supported claims
about friendship. Aristotle argues that friendship is necessary for the self-sufﬁciency of a complete life that secures a
rational agent's good (EN 1170b17–19). Similarly, the city is the complete community, securing a complete and selfsufﬁcient life. The same conception of the human essence and the human good that forms Aristotle's conception of
the self-regarding virtues also supports his defence of friendship and justice. He does not concede the truth of
Thrasymachus' charge that justice is another person's good and a harm to oneself; he argues that it is a good to oneself
because it is another person's good, when the other person is a fellow-citizen. Nor does he simply rely on common
beliefs to answer Thrasymachus; he relies on strong dialectic.

19 The State
218. Conceptions of the State
Aristotle's account of how the political community promotes the human good supports an account of the ideal state,
and of the way actual states fall short of it. For a correct conception of happiness shows how a particular type of state
promotes the human good, and gives a virtuous person reason to care about it for its own sake; but it also shows what
the right sort of state must be like, and why many states cannot make this claim on the virtuous person's concern.
To ﬁnd the ideal state, and to decide the institutions and external conditions to be included in our description, we need
some clearer conception of the composition of happiness.
For if this 〈sc. the most choiceworthy〉 life is unclear, the best political system is bound to be unclear also. For it
is appropriate for those who have the best political system to do the best actions from what is available to them, if
nothing unexpected happens. (Pol. 1323a16–19)1
The constitution is the way of life of the city (1295a39–b1); and the correct aim for the city will identify the correct
constitution (1280b39–1281a4, 1323a14–19, 1328a37–b2).
A view about happiness forms the ‘basic assumption’ (hupothesis) of a political system (1317a39–b2; cf. 1271a39–b3).2
Errors about happiness explain some of the characteristic errors of non-ideal states, and a correct conception is
necessary for avoiding these errors.
Since happiness is the best thing, and it is a complete activity and exercise of virtue, and since it turns out that some
people are capable of a share in this, and others are capable to a small extent or not at all, clearly this is the cause of
the emergence of different types of cities and of a number of political systems. For since different people pursue
happiness in different ways and by different means, they make their ways of life and political systems different also.
(1328a37–b2)3
Even if people do not explicitly conceive the state as a community aiming at happiness, their conception of happiness
inﬂuences their expectations of the state, and hence the errors that they make in forming political systems.
Aristotle suggests that most people take happiness to consist in a life

408

CHAPTER 19 § 218

of gratiﬁcation of appetites or in a life of honour (EN 1095a19–23). These views share the assumption that happiness
consists in, or requires, the unlimited accumulation of ‘contested’ external goods (1168b15–19). It follows that
happiness appears to involve conﬂict and antagonism; we want a share of external goods that has no deﬁnite limit, and
so threatens the share available to others. Hence the rich and the poor are in conﬂict. Since the rich want to get richer,
the poor want to protect themselves from further impoverishment at the hands of the rich, and to enrich themselves at
their expense.
While this conception of happiness already helps to explain the characteristics of non-ideal political systems, Aristotle
also tries to attach a different conception to each of them. Oligarchs think happiness requires wealth, and that the state
is a large business partnership for the accumulation and distribution of wealth. The rich are regarded as the large
shareholders who put up the largest amount of capital for the enterprise; and hence it seems only reasonable that they
should get the largest share of the proﬁts (Pol. 1280a25–31).
In contrast with the oligarchic appeal to wealth, the basic assumption of democracy is freedom (1317a40–b17).
Democrats argue that if people are equal in the one respect of being free rather than slaves, they are equal altogether,
and should have an equal share in ruling (1280a24–5).4 Freedom matters because happiness consists in gratiﬁcation of
our desires, and hence requires us to live as we wish; we achieve this best if no one rules us, and the next best is to take
our turn in ruling and being ruled (1317b12–17).
Though the pursuit of gratiﬁcation is the primary source of the oligarchic and democratic outlooks, the pursuit of
honour is the source of competition even beyond what is needed to secure the resources needed for a life of
gratiﬁcation. Love of honour is traditionally characteristic of the Greek upper classes, and so Aristotle normally thinks
of it as a motive for the few (1266b38–1267a2; cf. 1302a31, 1311a5–7), explaining the rivalries and competitions that
may threaten an oligarchy, or encourage the pursuit of tyrannical power. The many, however, are also moved by
honour. Though they are not eager to maximize their wealth, they want to protect it for their enjoyment; and similarly,
though they are not eager to compete for honour, they will not easily put up with a dishonoured and slavish condition
(cf. 1274a15–18, 1281b28–30). Competitive pursuit of honour in one class conﬂicts with aversion to dishonour in
the other.
Aristotle argues that these mistaken conceptions of happiness explain much of what is wrong with the prevalent
political systems. But he also intends them to support his conception of happiness, since it shows how

CHAPTER 19 § 219

409

they grasp part of the truth or result from an intelligible mistake. In Aristotle's view, honour and sensual gratiﬁcation
are genuine intrinsic goods; but the right sort of honour does not require competition for external goods, and the right
extent of gratiﬁcation does not require an unlimited supply of them. Virtuous action, which most people take to be at
best an instrumental good (1271b6–10), is the primary constituent of happiness; and ignorance of this explains the
mistaken classiﬁcation of goods in different political systems.
Democrats turn out to be right to prefer a system in which all the citizens take turns in ruling and being ruled. But they
are wrong to prefer it simply as a means to being left alone to gratify their desires as they please; for in fact political
activity is an intrinsic good, part of the virtuous life. Once we ﬁnd the right reason for valuing political activity, we ﬁnd
further reasons for disagreeing with the democratic belief in lax qualiﬁcations for citizenship and in minimal
government.5 Oligarchs are right to reject these lax qualiﬁcations, but they are wrong to make wealth the condition for
citizenship, since they have the wrong view of the place of wealth in happiness. A correct view of happiness and its
political consequences will allow us both to learn from these mistaken views and to correct their mistakes.

219. The Human Good and the Citizen
The requirements of Aristotelian happiness determine some of the conditions for citizenship. A rational agent wants to
have the right character and to do the right actions himself, but also wants the characters and actions of other people
to be appropriately related to his own. Happiness requires extended concern for people of equal virtue, and the
virtuous person has this concern for friends, including fellow-citizens. Hence Aristotle often insists that citizens of the
best city should be equal and similar, and that in general citizens should approximate to this relation (1277b7–16,
1325b7–10, 1332b12–41).6
On the other hand, friendship beneﬁts me partly because it extends my concerns into the concerns of others. For this
purpose it is important that friends should have different interests and concerns. Though I may not have time to be
both a musician and an athlete myself, I will beneﬁt from my concern with a friend's musical projects, and he will
beneﬁt from concern with my athletic projects. Since I cannot achieve a complete and self-sufﬁcient life by myself, I
need a city; and the city adds what I lack only if its different members contribute something different; I would not gain
a self-sufﬁcient and complete life if all of us

410

CHAPTER 19 § 219

were merely musicians or merely athletes (1261b10–15, 1263b29–35). If the city secures a happy life, it must secure it
for individual citizens.7 Citizens should therefore have some different aims and concerns.
The appropriate degrees of similarity and difference between citizens are captured in Aristotle's general account of a
citizen. He argues that citizenship is having a share in judging and ruling (1275a22–33). He recognizes that this
deﬁnition will not ﬁt all political systems exactly, but replies that we must not expect to ﬁnd a single deﬁnition that
exactly ﬁts all cases (1275a33–b5).8 If he had chosen some lower qualiﬁcation, his account would have applied to more
political systems.9 But he picks the higher qualiﬁcation, because he wants to understand the other cases as
approximations to it.10
The deﬁnition shows the place of citizenship in a happy life in the ideal state. Happiness includes essentially political
activities, and the account of citizenship describes some of these activities; ruling and judging are parts of the virtuous
person's concern for the common good.
Aristotle's conditions for citizenship are demanding because the citizen has to be the virtuous person, whose activities
are possible only in the ideal state. In general, the virtues of the good man and the good citizen are distinct. The
completely good man will have the virtues of the ruler, but the good citizen only needs the virtues of the subject; hence
he needs only true belief, not wisdom (1277b25–32), and will be a good citizen without being a good man. This
distinction will not apply, however, to the ideal city, where each citizen both rules and is ruled (1278a40–b5). Here the
good citizen will also be the good man, since his role as citizen requires him to have all the virtues (1288a32–b2).11
These claims about the good man and the good citizen do not imply that the non-ideal states include good men who
do not ﬁt into that system as good citizens. Someone cannot be a good man without being a good citizen and without
having the relations to others that make the full range of virtuous actions possible and reasonable. Without the ideal
city there will be no good men. Aristotle's views about human nature and happiness imply the necessity of an ideal city
for individual happiness.
In arguing that the good man and the good citizen must be identical, Aristotle recognizes essentially political
constituents of happiness. Happiness includes virtuous activity, since this fully realizes rational agency; virtuous activity
must include the extended deliberation and rational action that results from friendship; and the same argument justiﬁes
the further extension to political activity. The good citizen in the ideal state is not merely doing what is instrumentally
necessary for his good; he realizes it in his political activities themselves.

CHAPTER 19 § 220

411

220. The Human Good and Leisure
Aristotle's conception of happiness requires an active conception of citizenship that is best satisﬁed in a democracy
(1275b5–6). On the other hand, his narrow conception of the qualiﬁcations for citizenship implies a criticism of
democracy. For citizens must be equal and virtuous, and able to engage in the right sorts of activities. Natural slaves
cannot be citizens, since they have no conception of happiness (1280a31–4), and lack the capacity for deliberation and
decision that is required for virtue and happiness (1260a12; cf. 1254b22–4). Moreover, manual workers should be
excluded from citizenship, and not regarded as parts of the city at all, because their way of life deprives them of the
freedom and leisure (scholê) that are necessary conditions for the right sort of virtuous life. This stage of Aristotle's
argument needs discussion, to see if his account of the human good really supports his restriction of political rights to
a leisured elite.
A free person differs from a slave in so far as a slave is for the sake of another and a free person is for his own sake
(Met. 982b25–6). A master is a slave's master, but does not belong to the slave, while the slave belongs to the master in
the way the master's parts or tools belong to him (Pol. 1254a8–17). ‘Belonging to oneself ’ does not refer simply to a
legal status, but to the agent's control over his actions, and to the ends for which he acts. The slave acts wholly in the
interest of another; and the other's interest is independent of and insensitive to his own interest, even if it coincidentally
promotes his own interest (1278b32–7).12
Hence it seems slavish to live entirely in dependence on someone else and his interests (Rhet. 1367a32–3), and the free
person is one who is neither forced to do this nor has the slavish inclination to do it. The virtuous person chooses
freedom for himself; for he wants to guide his life by his own rational agency, not by mere conformity to the will of
another. The magnanimous person refuses to form his life in relation to someone else, except for a friend (EN
1124b31–1125a2); and in that case the friend does not impose his will. For a friend is another self, and the aims of a
friend will themselves be the result of the deliberation and choice that both have shared.
Aristotle holds that freedom and independence require leisure.13 Leisure is not ‘being at leisure’, if that suggests being
unoccupied; nor is it recreation as opposed to serious business (cf. EN 1176b27–1177a6). It is contrasted, however,
with being occupied in the production of necessities (Pol. 1333a30–6); the self-sufﬁcient city has to provide enough
resources for a life of leisure, which is not occupied in securing the necessary resources (1326b26–32).
Leisure is not necessary for virtuous action (1334a22–8); but Aristotle

412

CHAPTER 19 § 220

thinks it is necessary for the sort of freedom that the virtuous person values. Necessary occupations allow some
choice, in so far as I can be an unjust or just farmer or electrician, and I can perhaps choose which occupation to enter.
But my choice is limited; I have to do something to make a living, and I have to conform to the demands of my
occupation if it is the source of my living. Though my choices and decisions are important, they make less difference,
and are less free, than they are when I am not constrained by the demands of necessity. Occupations involve some
‘mixed’ actions that are a mixture of voluntary and involuntary elements; and though these allow choice and decision,
the difference between the virtuous and the vicious decision is not as clear here as elsewhere (cf. EN 1110a11–19,
1115b7–10, 1116a29–b3). The virtuous person will act virtuously as far as he can; but his virtuous decision cannot
design his life as it can if he has leisure.
Leisure implies the freedom from constraint that is important for the exercise of the virtues, as Aristotle conceives
them. Generosity and magniﬁcence require a comfortable surplus that allows the appropriate uncalculating attitude;
the generous person's virtue forces him into disagreeable choices if it threatens the necessities of his life (cf.
1121b24–6). Magnanimity harms the magnanimous person if his external resources are so limited that any envy or
resentment threatens his supply of necessities. Friendship requires friends to choose to share their lives and common
pursuits. If necessities make it difﬁcult to share their lives, or require them to follow different pursuits from those they
would prefer, then the life of friendship is not fully achieved.
If necessity does not constrain the virtuous person, then the shape of his life more completely expresses his decision. A
rational agent who chooses effective rational agency in the whole of his life wants to make as many choices as possible
in conditions of leisure, to the extent that this is consistent with the requirements of virtue. Hence we are best off in a
community in which the requirements of virtue and necessity do not constrain our choices, and so our characters and
decisions have maximum effect.
Leisure distinguishes a free person's life from a slave's. If a virtuous person becomes a slave, he will still have
opportunities to be virtuous, as Epictetus would be pleased to point out. But he will have to live a slavish life, to the
extent that he must devote his energies to securing necessities for himself; his life is prescribed in a series of tasks that
he must fulﬁl on pain of some grave penalty. For someone naturally suited to be a slave, lacking the capacity to shape
his life by decision (Pol. 1260a12), the pressure of necessity is no harm; but for someone with the capacity that the
natural slave lacks it is a serious harm.

CHAPTER 19 § 221

413

221. Leisure as a Condition of Freedom
Part of Aristotle's interest in leisure reﬂects the narrow range of activities open to a person constrained by necessity.
The necessities of life characteristically require dull, repetitive work making minimal demands on rational agency and
virtue. If a person's life is occupied with these, then, even if he chooses and pursues them virtuously, much of his
capacity for rational agency goes unused. Without denying value to the virtuous action in constrained conditions,
Aristotle rejects the Stoic view that the realization of rational agency in virtuous action is the only realization needed for
happiness.
While we want rational agency to be exercised in our lives, some types of exercise are preferable to others. We may
exercise it even when we decide to make the best of a bad job, and when a less virtuous person would make the same
choice. But we prefer the exercise of reason when we are free to do more than adapt ourselves to disagreeable
conditions that we would rather avoid. We prefer the exercise of rational agency in conditions that allow its maximum
extension and development in forming the character of our lives.
Aristotle values an aspect of freedom to which a Stoic such as Epictetus is indifferent. The Stoic cares about the actual
causal relation of rational agency to the agent's actions; if my action is the result of my virtuous decision, then, in the
Stoic view, the demands of self-realization and rational agency are satisﬁed, even if I would have had to do the same
action for some other reason if I had not done it for this reason, and even if the same result would have happened
from some other cause. Aristotle agrees that this Stoic agency is a genuine and important expression of rational agency,
since even in highly constrained circumstances ‘the ﬁne shines through’ (EN 1100b30–3); but he denies that it is the
only valuable aspect of rational agency. He implies that it is reasonable to want our rational agency to make a difference
to what happens, so that the result is different from what it otherwise would have been. This is another reason why
happiness requires circumstances much more favourable than those that permit virtuous action (Pol. 1332a7–27).14
Aristotle's conception of a person as a designer or craftsman suggests why he values making a difference. A friend sees
his own rational agency especially realized in what he does for his friend, as a craftsman ﬁnds himself realized in his
product (EN 1168a5–8).15 The craftsman reasonably values the distinctive realization of himself in the
world——something that exists because of him and would not have existed otherwise. The same sort of concern
seems reasonable for the rational agent concerned with his own individuality and distinctiveness; and to

414

CHAPTER 19 § 222

the extent that this concern is reasonable, so is Aristotle's concern with leisure.
Aristotle has good reasons, then, for his preference for leisure. It reﬂects what he takes to be a central requirement for
rational agency. Since Aristotle is describing the ideal state that fully achieves happiness, he is justiﬁed when he insists
that the citizens must have leisured lives, free from the demands of necessity.

222. Aristotle's Misuse of His Argument
Do these points about leisure show that manual workers, and especially menial (banausoi) workers, should not be
citizens of the ideal city?
Aristotle rejects the menial character that is ‘unleisured and abased’ (Pol. 1337b14–15). A menial and abased person is
so concerned about necessities and his provision for them that he is timorous and lacking in initiative, and so resorts to
slavish ﬂattery (EN 1125a1–2), since he lacks the conﬁdence that is needed for the growth of magnanimity. He
displays the insecure and suspicious attitude that encourages meanness (cf. 1121b21–31). In circumstances of leisure
and afﬂuence he cannot use his good fortune properly, but simply becomes insolent and aggressive (Pol. 1334a22–40).16
The only goods he values are the contested goods that supply necessities; and when he has enough of these, he can
think of nothing better to do than to go on accumulating them (1271b2–10).17
Aristotle rejects not only the menial character, but also the menial life (1328b39–1329a2).18 We cannot practise the
actions that belong to virtue if we live the life of a menial worker or a hired labourer (1278a20–1), since none of their
actions involves virtue (1319a26–8).19
Menial activities by themselves do not make a person menial. A citizen may do some menial services for himself
without becoming menial (1277b3–7); and the subordination of the young to their elders may involve menial services,
but it is not menial, since it is for a ﬁne end (1333a6–16, 1337b17–21). It is only an unworthy end that makes the
action base (1341b10–17; cf. Rhet. 1419b7–9). Aristotle reasonably comments: ‘In relation to what is ﬁne or not ﬁne
the actions do not differ so much in themselves as in the end and what they are done for’ (1333a9–11). If the right end
changes the nature of the action, then apparently someone with the right moral education could do menial actions for
the right end, without living a menial life and without forming a menial character.
It might be true that we are likely to form a menial character if we are compelled to spend all our time, without
countervailing inﬂuences, in occupations where success requires the subordination of virtue to other

CHAPTER 19 § 222

415

aims. But if menial work is not our full-time occupation, it is consistent with the leisure and wealth needed for the
development of virtue; and if we have some material security, we might apparently have a chance of cultivating the
virtues.20
The circumstances of the ideal state make it reasonable to consider this possibility that Aristotle neglects. For if the
citizens are freed from menial labour altogether, they must use the labour of non-citizen menial workers—natural
slaves and foreigners.21 If they do this, they will be admitting potentially discontented and dangerous non-citizens into
the state. Since they cannot pretend to consider the interests of the menials, they must rule them by force, threats, and
incentives that make them even more menial and potentially dangerous than they were already.22 Aristotle seems to
have a choice between this sort of relation to non-citizen labourers and a relation of friendship among citizens who
share menial work among themselves. It is not clear why the ideal character of the city allows him to reject the second
option.23
Indeed, perhaps the argument for the second option can be strengthened. The argument for extending friendship from
a small group of virtuous individuals to the more heterogeneous association of the state assumed that a virtuous
person will want to be on terms approximating to the best type of friendship with more people rather than fewer. He
wants to extend his concern because he realizes his own capacities more fully to the extent that he shares in the
cooperative deliberation and action of a community.
If Aristotle relies on this argument, he ought to conclude that it is desirable for citizens to cooperate with each other as
widely as possible in the activities that they have to manage; such a cooperative arrangement seems far preferable, on
ethical grounds, to the relation of citizens to their non-citizen menial workers.24 It is not clear why this arrangement is
empirically impracticable.25
Aristotle's own total rejection of menial labour for the citizens has, therefore, no sufﬁcient basis in his ethical theory; it
reﬂects an implausible empirical assumption, or a social prejudice, or the ﬁrst supported by the second. He is right to
suppose that immersion in the outlook of someone who must struggle for a precarious living, with no opposing
inﬂuence on his character, is likely to conﬂict with the attitude required by virtue. He is equally right to insist on a life
of leisure for his ideal citizen. But he is not justiﬁed in proscribing all menial work for the citizens, since menial work
does not by itself always constitute a menial life, and the ideal state may actually be harmed by the arrangement
Aristotle prefers.
Since Aristotle's ethical principles do not support his conclusion about manual workers, disagreement with his
conclusion does not justify

416

CHAPTER 19 § 223

rejection of his ethical principles. Indeed we can use the principles to correct some of Aristotle's political
recommendations.

223. Moral Education as a Task for the State
Aristotle has found that a city is necessary for happiness not simply because it provides security and conveniences, but
because happiness includes activities that are essentially activities of virtuous citizens concerned about the common
good. If this is the city's role in happiness, then the functions and tasks of the city will be different from what we would
take them to be if we held a narrower conception of its role.26
Aristotle argues that happiness essentially includes virtuous character and actions, and that these include essentially
political activities. The virtues of character that are components of happiness cannot be reliably secured without a
systematic programme of moral education, and the state is by far the most suitable community to undertake moral
education (EN 1180a14–32).27 Not every state fulﬁls this function equally well; some do not bother about moral
education at all (1180a23–9), and each political system encourages different sorts of relations between citizens (viii 10).
Aristotle ascribes an explicit concern for moral education only to the cities that care about good laws and good order,
and criticizes the cities that ignore public education.28 For this reason also, we should study the differences between
political systems, and ﬁnd the one that is best for the proper task of the state (1181b15–23).
Despite these variations between states, Aristotle suggests that they typically care about the character of citizens, not
merely about the avoidance of injustice (Pol. 1280a40–b8). He even claims that this moral concern distinguishes the
state from some narrower communities.
Hence it is evident that a city that is correctly, not just verbally, so called must be concerned about virtue. For
otherwise the community turns out to be an alliance, differing from the other alliances, those between people at a
distance, only in the proximity of the allies, and law turns out to be a contract, and, as Lycophron the sophist said, a
mutual guarantor of what is just, but not such as to make the citizens good and just. (1280b8–12)
If we deny that the city has any moral concern, Aristotle challenges us to explain why a city is more than a mere
alliance.
If Aristotle's claim is to be plausible, even states that neglect moral education must show enough moral concern to
distinguish them from Lycophron's minimal state. And indeed some of them regulate the permissible occupations for
citizens, and all of them hold some

CHAPTER 19 § 223

417

occupations more than others in public honour and esteem (1293b12–14). In so far as a state takes any of these
attitudes, it does not ﬁt Lycophron's conception.
Aristotle must also refute Lycophron's view even for a state that consciously, even conscientiously, refrains from public
moral education. Such a state actually conﬁrms Aristotle's claim, if it argues that people will live best if they are free
from coercive or persuasive interference. This argument appeals to a conception of the good life to defend a policy of
inactivity; but if we simply form a trading partnership, we need no such defence of its limited aims, since we take the
limits for granted. The city is different, in so far as limitation of its concerns needs some defence that will itself appeal
to the happiness of the citizens. The democratic states that regard freedom as the major good, and identify freedom
with living as one pleases (1259a39, 1307a34, 1310a32, 1317b1, 1318b39, 1319b30), avoid interference on principle.
Modern states that limit the functions of government often assume that individuals get on better if left to themselves.
Defenders of Lycophron need not say this; they could consistently argue that the limited state is the only just
arrangement, even though it leaves all its members worse off than they would be under a less minimal state. In fact,
however, advocates of a minimal state have been noticeably and understandably reluctant to make such a concession.29
If non-interventionist policies argue from the good of the citizens, they are not counterexamples to Aristotle's claim.
Aristotle suggests that Lycophron's account cannot describe the essential functions of the state. If in fact the state
should behave as the minimalist principles say it should, these principles must be secondary principles, derived from a
broader conception of a state as a community pursuing happiness. Aristotle believes that once we recognize the
essential aim of the state, the minimalist principles will not even seem to be plausible secondary principles.
When Aristotle, therefore, contrasts Lycophron's minimal state with the law that is ‘such as to make citizens good and
just’ (1280b12), he really collapses two contrasts into one. The state's concern for the happiness of some or all of the
citizens refutes Lycophron; and a state shows this concern even if it refrains from public moral education, as long as it
argues for such a policy by appeal to the good of the citizens. Aristotle's more speciﬁc concern is concern for public
moral education; and he argues that this speciﬁc concern is the right expression of the general concern for happiness.
Aristotle explains the defective attitude of some states to moral education by referring to their defective conception of
happiness; for a

418

CHAPTER 19 § 223

state's conception of happiness is the basic assumption of its political system (1317a40–b17), and its attitude to moral
education reﬂects its views about happiness. Aristotle sharply distinguishes happiness, as the proper concern of the
city, from wealth and security, which are necessary means to happiness, and hence deﬁne a purely ancillary function of
the state (vii 8).30 Non-ideal states do not recognize that happiness consists in virtuous action, and so they cannot have
the right reasons for undertaking moral education; they undertake it for, at most, instrumental reasons, to make their
citizens ﬁt the constitution better, not because the result will in itself be good for the citizens.

224. The Defence of Moral Education
Even if we agree with Aristotle's claim that a state is characteristically and properly concerned about the character of its
citizens, we need not yet agree that it ought to educate them itself. For perhaps systematic moral education will do
more harm than good. Perhaps the sort of character we want to form is not best formed by the sort of training offered
by public education; or perhaps, as the democratic assumption holds, freedom is itself such an important good that we
should not interfere with it as we would by public moral education.
Aristotle answers the ﬁrst objection by appealing to the nature of the virtues to be acquired. If we did not think the
virtues of character were very important for happiness, we might excusably underestimate the importance of
systematic moral education. Or again, we might think the virtues are valuable only because they produce these habits
of conformity that are the legislator's concern. Aristotle, however, insists that the virtues and the actions they cause,
not merely the conforming actions, are constituents of happiness; and so the legislator ought to care about the
character of the citizens (1280b2), not simply about what they do. Since the Aristotelian virtues depend on the proper
formation of habit, emotion, and immediate response, we cannot sensibly wait to learn them until we are old enough
to decide for ourselves.
Moreover, habits and responses will be weak and confused if they are encouraged only by, say, parents, but discouraged
by the attitudes prevailing in social life. If parents encourage a child to regard wealth and honour as comparatively
unimportant, but she grows up in a state that values these goods to excess, she will ﬁnd it hard to form any stable
character, let alone the right one.31 If Aristotle is right about the nature of the virtues and the training they require, and
right also about the inﬂuence of the state on the habits and characters of its citizens, he has made a strong prima facie
case for public moral education.32

CHAPTER 19 § 225

419

These arguments show why it is in my interest to undergo public moral education in the ideal state. But it is also in my
interest for other citizens to undergo it. For since happiness requires friendship with virtuous friends, I have reason to
want other people to be virtuous. In the best city citizens are associated by the mutual admiration and concern that is
characteristic of the best type of friendship; hence each of us has an interest in having fellow-citizens who are virtuous
enough to be associated with us in the proper relations.

225. The Apparent Conict Between Freedom and Moral Education
Aristotle's argument for public moral education is not conclusive. For if the bad effects of public moral education are
serious enough to outweigh the advantages described by Aristotle, he will have failed to make his case.
He requires the virtuous person to act on an intelligent and informed decision that causes her to choose the virtuous
action for its own sake, not from blind habit or fear of social pressure (EN 1144a13–20). If there is strong social
pressure for conformity, then other motives will make me conform if the virtuous motive does not; but I may also be
moved by the virtuous motive, and it may still be sufﬁcient for my action in conditions (actual or counterfactual) where
other motives are insufﬁcient. We must realistically allow the virtuous person more than one motive for her action.
Elsewhere, however, Aristotle rejects an apparently parallel argument. In his defence of leisure he is unimpressed by
the fact that we can perform a necessary task both because it is necessary and because we decide that it is ﬁne. The
best activities must be chosen when they are not necessary; for we want our rational agency to make an actual
difference to our lives, to shape them without the pressure of necessity. If this is Aristotle's view of leisure, should it
not also be his view about moral education? Should he not, therefore, require a degree of freedom that precludes
public enforcement of moral education?33
Leisure secures freedom, in so far as it leaves a person independent of the pressures of necessity, to live in ways that
most fully express and realize her own will. Public moral education seems to violate Aristotle's conditions for freedom,
even if my own will also endorses it.
The important good that Aristotle seems to forget in his defence of public moral education is fully recognized in a
conception of freedom that he seems to dismiss rather hastily. Democracy is the political system that, on his own
account of it, seems to come closest to assigning

420

CHAPTER 19 § 225

the right status to a free person. A fundamental assumption of democracy is freedom, interpreted as ‘living as one
wishes’ (Pol. 1317a40–b17; cf. 1259a39, 1307a34, 1310a28–36, 1318b39, 1319b30, Rhet. 1366a4).
Aristotle is surprisingly hostile to this democratic conception of freedom: ‘But this is unworthy; for living in relation to
the political system (pros tên politeian) must be regarded, not as slavery, but as safety’ (1310a34–5). In mentioning slavery
Aristotle shows how we might argue from his own conception of freedom to the democratic conception. He does not
satisfactorily answer the argument. Even if less freedom to live as one wishes were safer, it still might be slavish; it
might involve a sacriﬁce of freedom under the pressure of necessity, and the democrat might argue that such sacriﬁces
should be as small as possible.
Aristotle's defence of public moral education may increase our suspicions. Since the whole city, he says, has one
common end, it should also have one common system of education aimed at it.
And at the same time none of the citizens should think he belongs to himself, but all should think they belong to the
city, since each is a part of the city; and the treatment of each part naturally aims at the 〈proper〉 treatment of the
whole. (1337a27–30)
Aristotle alludes to opponents who allege that his policy on moral education conﬂicts with his conception of a free
person as belonging to oneself. He explains that since I am a part of the city, I should suppose that I belong to the city,
not to myself.34
This argument requires a strong organic conception of the state and the individual; if the end of each individual
consists wholly in her contribution to the end of the city, and the converse does not hold, nothing need be considered
in her moral education except the interests of the city (1260b13–18). But Aristotle's conception of happiness supports
only a weaker organic claim, that an individual cannot achieve her complete happiness without the city. This weak
organic conception does not imply that my whole essence is my belonging to the city; and therefore it does not support
Aristotle's strong claim about moral education.
Aristotle's opponent suggests that public moral education reduces free persons to the condition of slaves, in so far as
they will no longer belong to themselves. Aristotle's attempt to meet this objection by appeal to the organic analogy
only makes things worse for him; for the strong organic conception of the individual and the state is open to criticism
precisely because it seems to overlook the vital difference between a free person and a slave or an organ (cf.
1254a8–13). In answering the objection Aristotle seems merely to conﬁrm it.

CHAPTER 19 § 226

421

226. Aspects of Freedom
These objections to Aristotle's defence of moral education appeal to his own view of freedom, leisure, and
independence. His reply will show if we have found serious difﬁculties in his position.
Aristotle argues that it is slavish to live for another, with the crucial exception of a friend. The magnanimous person
follows this principle (EN 1124b31–1125a2); only the stubbornly wilful person is so disdainful of others that he
refuses to be guided by their desires at all (EE 1233b34–8). Aristotle notices that actions that would otherwise be
menial are not menial if I do them for myself or for a friend (Pol. 1277b5–7, 1337b17–21). Myself and my friend are
the two exceptions, since a friend is another self; in living for him I cease to live for myself alone, but I still live for
myself since I live for someone who is another self.
Living for a friend imposes some constraints on my life that I would be free of if I were not attached to him; but it
does not reﬂect an extension of necessity or a contraction of freedom and leisure. The constraints are those I have
rationally chosen for my own happiness, without the pressure of needs and necessities; and whereas I would prefer a
life that was free of the necessity of earning a precarious living, I would not prefer a life without the constraints
imposed by friendship.
If the ideal city rests on an extension of the best type of friendship, the virtuous person's relation to the city is not
slavish. A virtuous citizen who regards his fellow-citizens as his friends is concerned about the common good of all of
them as a part of his own good. In so far as his actions are regulated by the common good, he is not being made to live
for another as the slave is; for the slave's interests have no independent weight (cf. 1278b32–7). None of this is true of
citizens.
Each citizen, therefore, wants his fellow-citizens to be virtuous, and each wants all of them to share the common
moral education that makes them all virtuous. A common moral education is not a disagreeable constraint or an
arduous burden. Virtuous citizens welcome it as part of the good that they choose for the ideal state. Hence it does not
violate the conditions that make leisure more choiceworthy than necessity.35
To some extent Aristotle agrees that freedom is living as one wishes; but he denies that living as one wishes requires
freedom from the constraints of law or moral education.
In a household the free people are least at liberty (exeinai) to act at random, but have everything or most things
ordered, whereas slaves and beasts have only a little ordered to the common end 〈of the household〉, and mostly
〈are at liberty to act〉 at random; for that is the sort of originating principle (archê) that the nature of each of them
is. (Met. 1075a19–23)
This claim is intentionally paradoxical. It is natural to connect being free

422

CHAPTER 19 § 226

(eleutheros) with the maximum extent of freedom or liberty (exousia) to do as one pleases, and hence to agree with the
democratic conception of what suits a free person. In fact, however, we should identify greater freedom with the
greater extension of my rational control over the conditions of my life.
Democratic freedom leaves me with an area of private life under my control, and democratic education encourages me
to think that the state's constraints on me are impositions of necessity, to be kept to the minimum. In the ideal state,
however, the system of education, and the whole political system itself, are the expression of my own rational will,
since friendship associates me with the rest of the community.
I should therefore not regard the system of education as interference, but as part of the system that I rationally choose
by identifying my own interest with the common interest. The law is not imposed on citizens in someone else's interest;
it prescribes what is required for the common good, which is part of each citizen's good. Hence no virtuous citizen has
any reason to believe that the law reﬂects anyone else's interest or will in opposition to his own.36

227. The Reconciliation of Freedom and Moral Education
Aristotle's high estimate of freedom is therefore consistent with his apparently anti-libertarian claims about moral
education. To show that he is wrong about the ideal city, we must either reject his attempts to show how friendship is
its basis, or argue that, despite everything he says, each citizen has a right to freedom that prohibits interference in his
education.
Aristotle might reply that complete non-interference is impossible towards a child, and that considerable interference is
inevitable for anyone who grows up and lives in a society. If we are not to replace the authority of the state with the
authority of parents, we must defend the minimum feasible degree of interference. But this may not affect people any
less than systematic training would affect them. Aristotle suggests that in the absence of systematic training, people
tend to exaggerate and to adopt the prevalent habits and characters of their political system, to their own harm and the
harm of the system (Pol. 1310a19–28, 1318b39–1319a1, 1319b27–32).
He can argue further that the alleged right to non-interference harms individuals, since they lose the opportunity to
become virtuous, which usually or often requires the appropriate upbringing and habituation (1334b6–17), and is
always aided by it. It is useless to say that the choice

CHAPTER 19 § 226

423

is left to individuals; for if they have been very badly brought up, the choice that is most in their interest may not attract
them. Minimizing interference seems hard to justify if it prevents or hinders the choice that really beneﬁts the
individuals.
Still, Aristotle's discussion of the issue is unfair and misleading. He does not admit that democratic freedom includes
anything important; but Aristotelian freedom is an empty fraud without some democratic non-interference. For
reasons that Aristotle himself insists on, the citizen will not escape a slavish condition if he simply gives his rational
assent to a way of life that is independent of his will, or if he is not allowed to develop his own will by comparing
alternative ways of life. It is hard to see how he can be properly free of the constraints of necessity without some
principles of non-interference.37 The ideal city, at least as much as any other, must avoid thoughtless conformity,
hypocrisy, and intolerance of reasoned dissent; it must leave a citizen some room to ‘live as he wishes’.
Aristotle has not arbitrated fairly between the conﬂicting common beliefs, and his presentation of democratic freedom
is one-sided.38 But his own theory shows us how to correct his exaggerations. His arguments about friendship and selfsufﬁciency explain what is defensible in the organic conception of the state and the citizen, and therefore show us what
is right in his criticism of democratic non-interference. On the other side, his advocacy of self-determination and
leisure, as the proper expressions of rational agency, show us why he is committed to more democratic freedom than
he recognizes. Reference to the foundations of Aristotle's political theory helps us to correct his own exposition of it.

20 Justice
228. General Justice
Aristotle's views about happiness, virtue, and friendship determine the shape of the ideal state. No virtue is more
important in his argument than justice, since it aims at the common interest of a community. Rational agency requires
concern for members of a community aiming at the common good; it therefore requires a just community. Aristotle's
conception of justice describes the different principles that display this concern for the common interest. He should
explain both how they promote the interest of the community and how a rational person has reason to follow them.
Aristotle argues for two distinct virtues, general and special justice, where common sense sees only one. To correct and
explain the common beliefs, he appeals to homonymy. One virtue, general justice, is concerned with the good of others
and, more exactly, with the common good of the political community (EN 1129b17–19).1 The other virtue, special
justice, is concerned with equality and fairness, and the avoidance of pleonexia, greedy encroachment on the goods justly
assigned to others (1129a31–b1, 1130a14–24, b6–16).
Aristotle denies the assumption of common sense that some one particular virtue of character differs from the others
in all the features that belong to the two forms of justice. The features of general justice, in his view, are not features of
one virtue as opposed to the others, but features of virtue of character as a whole. General justice turns out to be the
same state of character as virtue as a whole, and in calling it general justice, we refer especially to the concern of the
virtuous person for the common good of the political community (1129b25–7, 1130a7–13).2
Common sense is wrong because it suggests that concern for the common good is separable from the other virtues of
character. We might have thought that we could be brave, temperate, or good-tempered, even if we were indifferent to
the common good. But Aristotle believes that we cannot have any virtue of character without having them all
(1144b32–1145a2); and therefore we cannot have any without having justice. Aristotle thinks every virtue, not only
justice, is another's good; for each of them has its appropriate concern with the common good.

CHAPTER 20 § 229

425

This result is not surprising. Wisdom is required for any genuine virtue (1144b14–17); each virtue is deﬁned by the
rational account by which the wise person would deﬁne it (1107a1–2); the wise person deliberates by reference to a
true conception of his happiness (1140a25–8); a true conception of his happiness requires concern for the common
good of himself and his friends and fellow-citizens; hence a virtue that refers to his happiness will also refer to the
common good. To justify the connexion between justice and the other virtues of character, Aristotle needs his
argument about happiness and concern for the common good. His account of general justice revises the common
beliefs in the direction required by his systematic account of happiness and virtue. Strong dialectic has shown the
connexion between the human good and extended altruism; the virtues of character assume the same connexion;
hence Aristotle reasonably refuses to count general justice as a virtue distinct from the other virtues of character.

229. The Problem of Special Justice
Aristotle also recognizes a distinct virtue of special justice. We will understand him better if we attend to an ambiguity
in his view of extended altruism.
The virtuous person's concern is extended beyond himself. But is it extended to concern for the good of each other
person in the community, or to concern for the community? Certainly the good of the community must be closely
related to the good of the people in it, as Aristotle insists in his criticism of Plato (Pol. 1264b15–22). But it does not
follow that the two sorts of concern are the same, or require the same actions. The community persists even if it loses
one of its members; and concern for the community might sometimes seem to justify the sacriﬁce of the interest of
some of its members. But if we are concerned for each member, we may be less inclined to agree to such a sacriﬁce.
These questions are familiar in modern disputes about justice, arising from apparent conﬂicts between the collective
interest and the rights and interests of individual persons. Deontological theories characteristically appeal to rights and
duties, and teleological theories characteristically appeal to a collective interest. Kantian theories are characteristically of
the ﬁrst type, and utilitarian theories characteristically of the second type.
We might expect Aristotle to hold some sort of utilitarian theory. For his general ethical position is teleological, in so
far as it is guided by concern for an ultimate end, happiness; and his description of justice as

426

CHAPTER 20 § 229

the common advantage readily suggests a utilitarian conception of the public interest. Friendship, on the other hand,
requires concern for the other person for the other person's own sake; if justice rests on the same sort of concern, it
seems to prohibit the sacriﬁce of the individual person's interest for a collective interest. If Aristotle cannot explain his
position further, he has left a serious question about the implications of his argument for extended altruism.3
The account of general justice might suggest concern with the collective interest, since general justice is focused on the
common good of the political community, not on the good of individual members. But Aristotle attaches a distinct
sort of altruistic concern to special justice.
He distinguishes the two forms of justice, because he thinks that sometimes when we speak of justice or injustice we
are not referring to a generalized concern for the common good, manifested in some one of the virtues of character,
but to a more speciﬁc state of character manifested in justice, rather than some other virtue. In one way justice is not
parallel to bravery, but superordinate to it; in another way it is parallel and not superordinate.
Aristotle connects special justice with fairness and equality, and with the avoidance of greed (pleonexia). This greed
implies a comparative, indeed a competitive, assessment.4 Special injustice is restricted to external goods; these are
objects of competition (EN 1168b15–23), precisely because the supply of them is limited and if I get some of them
there is less left for you.
If the comparative aspects of greed are essential to special injustice, they distinguish it from the other vices. Fred is a
coward who wants to avoid military service because he wants to avoid the danger to himself. Bert, however, is unjust
because he wants to avoid military service so that others face the dangers he avoids. He wants to gain a comparative
advantage over them by escaping the burdens that he and they would justly share. Fred need not have any such desire;
he might even regret the fact that others bear the burden that he shirks. The desire to win at other people's expense is
characteristic of special injustice.5
This type of greed is not a necessary part of the other vices; and it reﬂects a distinct desire that needs to be curbed.
Social life with limited resources distributed according to some conception of fairness encourages the legitimate desire
not to be cheated out of what is due to me; but if this desire is unregulated, it may encourage me to beneﬁt myself at
the expense of others (cf. 1133b30–1134a13). This is a legitimate area for a distinct virtue.6
If I am too cowardly to face danger in the appropriate cause, then the common interest suffers, and so everyone's
interest suffers. But it does not follow that I have inﬂicted a harm or committed an injustice on any

CHAPTER 20 § 230

427

particular person in violation of what was justly due to him; there may have been no one in particular to whom my
standing and ﬁghting was justly due. Special justice seems to be concerned with particular people in a way that general
justice is not; it insists on proper respect for particular people in the fair allocation of external goods.
Some argument is needed to show that concern for the common beneﬁt is either necessary or sufﬁcient for proper
respect for others, or that concern for the interests of particular others is automatically concern for the common
interest. Aristotle's theory ought to show not merely that the two sorts of concern are consistent, but also that general
justice supports the particular concern of special justice.

230. Conditions for Just Distribution
Distributive justice concerns the distribution of goods, especially political power and ofﬁce, by the state to individuals.7
Aristotle argues that the right distributive criterion should be ﬁxed by worth, axia. But what is the just way to assess
someone's worth? He recognizes that this question is disputed between supporters of different political outlooks;
indeed he sees here the origins of the different types of constitutions and of the struggles between their partisans in a
single state (1131a24–9). In the Politics he suggests that this dispute should be settled by reference to the proper
function of a state (Pol. 1280a7–25).8 We need a state for living well, for achieving the self-sufﬁcient happy life
(1280b29–35). If we are concerned for the happy life, we will be concerned for a common good, and especially for the
common good of a political community. Distribution, therefore, seems to be regulated by forward-looking teleological
considerations; it seems reasonable to distribute power and ofﬁce to the virtuous people, those who are competent to
rule well with an eye on the end of the city.
Prospective arguments, however, seem to lead to further grounds for distribution. Some people will feel aggrieved and
excluded if they are denied a share, and will be rebellious and disaffected if their demands are ignored. Aristotle thinks
it is sensible to recognize the claims of those who will feel aggrieved if they have no share of power and ofﬁce. Those
excluded from them will rightly resent the exclusion because it is a denial of honour (1281b28–30). A citizen of a state
has an interest in having a share of this as of other shareable goods, and in having his worth recognized by the award
of it. Aristotle suggests that the true principles of distributive justice will recognize this interest, and protect the
citizen's claim to recognition of his worth. He therefore seems to introduce a further prospective criterion for
distribution.

428

CHAPTER 20 § 231

But he does not seem to accept a purely prospective approach to distribution. He argues:
Hence those who contribute most to this sort of community, these have a greater share in the city than those equal
or greater in free status and birth but unequal in political virtue, or those superior in wealth but inferior in virtue.
(1281a4–8)
If we consider the past contributions of different people, our attitude seems to be retrospective.9
Aristotle recognizes competence, social stability, and reward for merit, as three different grounds of distributive justice.
We might think that these grounds will conﬂict. The principle of recognizing merit is retrospective, and does not seem
certain to reward the people who will be most competent in the future. And if power and ofﬁce go to people who will
otherwise be aggrieved, that may be a sensible concession to expediency, but we might wonder if it is really just. The
common good of the community seems to suggest two conﬂicting prospective criteria, and each of these seems to
conﬂict with Aristotle's own retrospective criterion.
He argues, however, that wealth, free status, and numbers do contribute to political competence, and that distributive
justice requires their recognition in the assignment of wealth and power (1283a17–20); in the right circumstances the
collective opinions of the individually mediocre many may be better than the opinions of the wise few (1282a14–41). A
concession to wealth, birth, and numbers is not necessarily a sacriﬁce of justice to expediency.
Aristotle argues that there is no conﬂict between the just demands of individuals and the requirements of the common
interest. His basis for distribution is virtue and competence; but he avoids a conﬂict between fairness and the common
interest by associating fairness with virtue and by interpreting virtue widely enough to allow a share in ruling when
general justice requires it. Distributive justice, therefore, ensures distribution of external goods according to worth, and
speciﬁcally according to virtue. Since virtue is in our control, and we have reason to be virtuous, we have reason to be
satisﬁed with this pattern of distribution.

231. Retrospective Justice
The main difference Aristotle sees between corrective and distributive justice is the different role of equality. In
corrective justice we are not concerned with the worth and virtue of the parties involved in an injustice; when we
consider Y's crime against X, we do not ask whether

CHAPTER 20 § 231

429

it is just for X to have had more than Y in the ﬁrst place. We treat X and Y as equals (1131b32–1132a6), in so far as we
restore the status quo ante by imposing a loss on Y and transferring what is taken from Y back to X (1132a24–b9).10
Corrective justice protects each citizen from pleonexia by another. It must ensure that as far as possible X does not lose
by Y's crime against him and that Y does not proﬁt by his crime against X. Since it is a form of special justice, it is
concerned with what is fair and equitable to a particular person, and with the particular aspects of fairness that require
the correction of any disturbance resulting from pleonexia. Its focus is restricted and retrospective; it does not consider
either the common good, or even the principles of distributive justice, but considers only the harm that has been done
and the means of restoring the status quo ante.
Corrective justice guarantees each person some compensation and protection against the pleonexia of others, since it is
intended to prevent your losing, and my gaining, by my pleonexia. The virtuous person will not lose by refraining from
pleonexia himself, and the others he cares about will not lose by being its victims.
A commercial transaction has its own proper type of special justice; it should involve exchange at a just price, which is
measured by the need of the parties involved (1133a25–7).11 Though Aristotle does not explain how to measure
degrees of need, he might be able to appeal to the relative importance of different components of our good. If, for
instance, someone correctly ﬁnds more of his happiness in painting than in eating, a just arrangement will make the
price of painting higher than the price of eating. When exchange conforms to commercial justice, then I will not ﬁnd
that I have greatly increased your supply of external goods, and hence your prospects for happiness, with only a slight
increase, or even an actual decrease in my own. If these unbalanced transactions are allowed, then they will allow
successful pleonexia, and a citizen cannot enter into the transaction with conﬁdence about his own prospects.12
We need to exchange these goods, because the same goods are not always useful to different people or to the same
person all the time (1129b1–4), and because they are contested goods, since one person cannot have more without
another having less (1168b15–23). Since there must be exchange, commercial justice guarantees that the exchange will
serve its intended purpose, of increasing the absolute level of external goods for each person and protecting his relative
position in relation to others.
Commercial justice is a part of special justice, because it offers these deﬁnite guarantees and protections against
pleonexia. Without a just

430

CHAPTER 20 § 232

system of prices, exchange would be an opportunity for pleonexia, since an astute person could manipulate it to improve
his own competitive position at the expense of another. Though Aristotle does not describe the workings of the
intended system of prices and exchange in any detail, he says enough to show how it is meant to display the
characteristic features of special justice.

232. The Relation Between General and Special Justice
Special justice offers guarantees based on a retrospective attitude that seems liable to conﬂict with the prospective
attitude we would expect from general justice. If we are to show on Aristotle's behalf that the two attitudes do not
conﬂict, we should be able to show that his account of altruism both explains and reconciles the two types of concern
for others.
I am justiﬁed in ﬁnding part of my good in the good of another, in so far as I value cooperative activities for ends that
we both value. My conception of my own good does not become entirely other-regarding, since I remain concerned
about the distribution of goods between us in a way that I need not be concerned about distribution between stages of
myself. Indeed this persistently self-conﬁned concern ensures that friendship involves concern for the other person,
not just a generalized concern for the sum of interests of two people.
Since I do not make my friend a part of myself, and do not make the two of us into one self, I am not indifferent about
which of us gains the beneﬁt.13 If Al sacriﬁces his life for Ann, there is clearly a beneﬁt that Ann gains and Al does not,
and this is a beneﬁt he wants to secure for her. The happiness of each consists partly in the happiness of the other, but
includes other elements also; that is how Al knows what to do to promote Ann's happiness. We expect Al to be aware
of the self-conﬁned aspects of his own happiness as well as of Ann's, and to maintain his rational concern for these
self-conﬁned aspects.
If the same sorts of reasons justify concern for the common interest of a larger community, the rational citizen does
not care only about maximizing the total. He distinguishes the self-conﬁned interests of different people, and wants
some protection against being required to sacriﬁce his own self-conﬁned interest to other people's. If the common
interest supports a virtue of general justice that he can value for itself, the common interest must include some
protection for the self-conﬁned interest of each citizen. Special justice protects this self-conﬁned interest. It is
concerned with external goods, which clearly belong to a person's

CHAPTER 20 § 232

431

self-conﬁned interest; it is not concerned with the goods that I secure for myself in so far as I secure the self-conﬁned
good of others.
Special justice does not protect us from all forms of interference with our self-conﬁned interest. Aristotle does not
assure us that if we refrain from pleonexia, our self-conﬁned interest will be left undisturbed. He rejects this contractual
conception of the state because it misses the state's essential function (Pol. 1280a40–b23). Since the rational agent is
interested in the common good as part of his own good, he will be willing to sacriﬁce some of his self-conﬁned interest
to the common good; and he may be willing to sacriﬁce some of the self-conﬁned interest of others for the same
reason.
Aristotle does not insist, then, that a law or policy satisﬁes general justice only if it advances everyone's self-conﬁned
interest more than any alternative would advance it. Sometimes a sacriﬁce by me may be justiﬁed because of some
common goal that is in everyone's interest, though not in my self-conﬁned interest. A state that tolerates some
inefﬁciency so that its members can take a wider role in government, or that imposes sacriﬁces to build temples, may
be pursuing the common interest without achieving everyone's self-conﬁned interest as fully as a different state might.
Aristotle's theory is ﬁrmly teleological; it is concerned with the common good of a community, which is the goal that
justiﬁes the requirements of special justice.
In the extension of Aristotelian friendship, concern for particular individuals is extended into a concern for the
common good of many individuals. But this concern is not indifferent to the distribution of goods between them. If I
am concerned about the self-conﬁned good of other individuals as I am concerned about my own, then I will want the
same sort of protection for it that I want for myself. Hence the type of regard for others that Aristotle can justify will
also justify the requirements of special justice.
We ﬁnd the system in Aristotle's account if we relate it to ﬁrst principles. We have to see the connexion between justice,
friendship, and altruism; and we have to see the account of altruism that emerges from Aristotle's account of rational
agency and his normative theory of the good. We can then explain his claims about justice, and we can see why they are
an important part of a defensible theory. Aristotle identiﬁes justice with the common interest of a city, and defends the
city by appeal to its role in a complete and happy life; he therefore defends justice by its relation to the good of a
rational agent. The account of justice conﬁrms our claims about the aim and structure of Aristotle's ethics.

432

CHAPTER 20 § 233

233. Errors About Justice
Aristotle's views on justice explain why the rational person will justiﬁably have the appropriate concern for the good of
others, and what principles should underlie the laws and institutions of a state that displays the right sort of concern for
the common interest. A correct conception of justice has a further critical function; for, in Aristotle's view, mistakes
about justice partly explain the errors of actual states.
At the most general level people seem to agree about justice. For everyone recognizes that the system should be just,
and that the just distribution will be equal and fair; but not everyone understands fairness correctly.
First we must understand the received deﬁnitions of oligarchy and democracy and the oligarchic and democratic
〈views of〉 justice; for they all fasten on some sort of justice, but make only limited progress, and do not describe
the whole of what is fully just. For instance, justice seems to be equality; and so it is—but for equals, not for
everyone. Again, inequality seems to be just; and so it is—but for unequals, not for everyone. But these 〈partisans
of each view omit〉 this part—equality or inequality for whom—and so make the wrong judgment; this is because
they are giving judgment in their own case, and most people are practically always corrupt judges in their own cases.
Now justice is justice for certain people, and the division in the things 〈to be distributed〉 corresponds to the
division in those to whom 〈they are disturbed〉, as we have said before in the Ethics. Hence all sides agree about
the equal amount of the thing 〈to be distributed〉, but dispute about who should receive it. They do this mainly
because, as we have just said, people are bad judges in their own cases, but also because each side makes some
progress in describing a sort of justice, and so thinks it describes unconditional justice; for 〈oligarchs〉 think that
if they are unequal in some aspects, e.g. wealth, they are unequal unconditionally, and 〈democrats〉 think that if
they are equal in some aspect, e.g. free status, they are equal unconditionally. (Pol. 1280a7–25; cf. 1282b14–23,
1301a25–36.)
Both democrats and oligarchs neglect the relevant qualiﬁcations that are needed to correct their views of justice.
To say no more than this would be quite unhelpful, since we still need to ﬁx the respects relevant to distribution of
power and ofﬁce, the basis of the ‘worth’ (axia) that is the proper measure of equality and fairness. Aristotle, however,
can also explain how to ﬁnd the right measure; we will ﬁnd it if we see that special justice depends on general, and we
have the correct conception of general justice. The proper basis for assigning worth in distribution will be whatever is
relevant for the common good, since that is the aim of general justice. Since a correct conception of the common good
requires a correct conception of happiness, a correct

CHAPTER 20 § 234

433

answer to the question about distribution must appeal to a true conception of happiness.
This is why Aristotle rests his criticism of erroneous constitutions and false conceptions of justice on his own views
about happiness and the functions of the state (1278b15–30, 1280a25–1281a4). The happy life requires leisured and
virtuous action with a sufﬁcient supply of external goods; hence the common interest will be what promotes that sort
of life. Since the best life does not consist in the accumulation of external goods, or in freedom from direction by the
state, we need not accept either the oligarchic or the democratic conception of happiness, and we can see what is
wrong with the conception of special justice and equality that results.
The intrinsic goodness of political activity makes an important difference to the distribution of political power and
ofﬁce. Political activity is part of happiness, because extended rational deliberation and collective action on it extends
the realization of a particular person's capacities as a rational agent. This political activity should be open to everyone
capable of it who values it correctly. If Aristotle were right to claim that menial and commercial workers cannot acquire
virtuous characters, he would be justiﬁed, as far as this argument goes, in excluding them from political activity; since
they would care about it only as a means to their other ends, it would not be a constituent of their good.
A true conception of the value of political activity makes it clear how a false conception shapes the oligarchic and
democratic views about distribution. For both sides take a purely instrumental attitude to political activity; while the
oligarch thinks it should be designed to promote the state's function of promoting private accumulation, the democrat
thinks it should be designed to promote the state's function of providing conditions for living as we please. In both
cases political activity is doubly instrumental, since it is instrumental to the working of the state, and this is
instrumental to some further end; neither political activity nor the state is accorded any intrinsic goodness.

234. Political Systems and Their Errors About Justice
Aristotle is right to claim that if his conception of political activity and the functions of the state is correct, it must
make a difference in principle to the distribution of political power and to the institutions controlling its exercise. For
the deviant political systems, questions of distribution are questions of instrumental efﬁciency. For Aristotle, some
of the

434

CHAPTER 20 § 234

questions must also be questions about intrinsic goodness; if shared political activity is an intrinsic good, we have an
argument for organizing the state to secure it, even if it is not maximally efﬁcient for some other purpose. We should
even be willing to accept some cost in efﬁciency if that is needed to promote further political activity at a desirable
level.
A true conception of the place of political activity in happiness shows, in Aristotle's view, that we should actually be
more strongly committed to the political principles underlying oligarchy and democracy than either oligarchs or
democrats are. Oligarchs favour selective qualiﬁcations for ruling, but only on instrumental grounds; if the state were a
more efﬁcient instrument of accumulation with a larger ruling class, oligarchs would favour a larger ruling class.
Aristotle, on the contrary, favours selective qualiﬁcations because these are needed to secure the intrinsic good of
political activity, conﬁning it to those who beneﬁt from it.
Democrats, on the other hand, think all citizens should share in ruling, but only for instrumental reasons; if a different
regime would be better at allowing us to live as we please, they would favour that. Aristotle wants all citizens to rule
because ruling is an intrinsic good for each of them. The deviant systems, in his view, have developed in their different
ways because they have overlooked important questions about the point of a state and a political system, and have
wrongly assumed that a system is to be evaluated only on instrumental criteria.
Aristotle is quite justiﬁed in deriving his criterion from his conception of the human good, and hence from the
metaphysical and psychological premisses on which that conception relies. To agree with him this far is to agree that
there is something wrong in principle with the defences that he considers for the deviant political systems. It is not
necessarily to agree that none of these systems can be justiﬁed; for we may ﬁnd that democracy is defensible on
Aristotle's principles, and that democrats have erred simply in the defence they have offered. We will be all the more
inclined to believe this if we are doubtful about his argument to disqualify menial workers from citizenship. The
reasonable conclusion of Aristotle's arguments may not be the one he actually draws.
It is equally doubtful that Aristotle's favoured distributive criterion actually follows from the moral and political
principles used to attack other criteria. In so far as he seems to believe, for instance, that superior virtue and service to
the community justly claims greater goods as its reward (1281a4–7, 1282b30–1283a3), he argues too quickly.14 The
principle that virtuous political activity is the goal of the state does not imply that past achievement in this activity
should be the standard for distribution of goods. More needs to be said to show that such a

CHAPTER 20 § 235

435

criterion of distribution will best promote the goal of the state, and Aristotle does not say all that is needed. Our views
on his distributive criterion should not prejudice us either for or against his views on the signiﬁcance of political
activity and the function of the state.

235. The Effects of Errors About Justice
Every regime claims that its distribution is just because it is fair and equal in the appropriate way. But not every such
claim is true; for all the non-ideal systems have a false conception of happiness, which deforms their conception of
justice, and explains their characteristic types of injustice.15 The institutions of a political system shaped by the wrong
conception of justice will themselves be unjust; they fail to prescribe what is ‘strictly’ or ‘fully’ (kuriôs) just (1280a9–11).
16
Moreover, the injustice of the system encourages particular forms of injustice in individuals, either because they are
useful to someone with the characteristic outlook of the system, or because the system does too little to discourage
them. These are the characteristic vices of oligarchy and democracy.17
The source of injustice and of vice in general is a false conception of happiness and of what is needed to achieve it. In
the Ethics Aristotle distinguishes the lives of gratiﬁcation and of honour. A life devoted to either of these ends mistakes
a part of happiness for the whole, and so overlooks the proper restraints on the pursuit of each. Since the two
mistaken lives share some common features that distinguish them from the correct life, they share some vices (cf. Pol.
1271a16–18). They also differ in certain ways producing distinct vices. Aristotle relies on this difference when he
attributes the vices of the honour-loving life to the few and the vices of the life of gratiﬁcation to the many
(1308a9–10, 1315a16–20, 1318b6).
If our conception of happiness concentrates on the expansion of desire and the increased accumulation of external
goods, we reach the oligarchic conception of the state as a partnership for the production of wealth. In an ordinary
partnership the smaller partners agree that it is in their interest to allow the large partners to have a larger share of the
proﬁts. This oligarchic conception of justice explains the characteristic oligarchic injustice—the pursuit of ever larger
accumulation, either by illegal injustice against the many, or by constitutional tricks and changes that will weaken the
position of the many, and hence make it easier for the few to proﬁt at their expense.
Aristotle claims that the deviant conceptions of justice have hit on something that is just (dikaiou tinos, 1280a9), even
though they fall short

436

CHAPTER 20 § 235

of complete justice.18 The oligarchic conception would be quite reasonable if a state were a business partnership for the
accumulation of wealth. Wealth is a legitimate external good, to be pursued to the right degree; but it promotes the
good of the individual or the community only in so far as it is limited by the pursuit of the ﬁnal good. Hence the
association seeking wealth needs to be limited by the proper aims of the association seeking the ﬁnal good; as Aristotle
says, political science has to supervise all the other sciences and pursuits, and determine their proper limits (EN
1094a27–b7). These are the limits that oligarchic justice fails to acknowledge.
If, on the other hand, we concentrate more on gratiﬁcation than on accumulation, we reach the democratic conception
of the state as a way of sharing the resources and arranging the laws so that individuals can gratify their own desires.
This is part of Aristotle's reason for treating freedom and equality as basic assumptions of democracy.
The democratic mistake is not the same as the oligarchic mistake of confusing a limited association with the political
association. The democratic conception of justice, prescribing numerical equality, is extensionally correct, if the
individuals being treated equally are equal in the relevant respects (Pol. 1280a11–12). The democratic conception of
happiness is also extensionally correct for the right people; for if virtuous people are left alone to live as they please,
they will want the institutions and pursuits of the ideal state.
Democrats ignore these background conditions, and so do not see why and in what circumstances their conception of
justice is extensionally correct. Since they do not see that virtuous activity, and especially political activity, is the end,
they do not see that this is the right basis for the claims of numerical equality. They assume that numerical equality ﬁts
those who are equally capable of gratiﬁcation, and so they misunderstand the proper scope of their principle of
equality.19
Comparison of oligarchic and democratic conceptions of happiness and justice shows that they make some of the
same mistakes. They do not disagree on the nature of the end or on its necessary conditions. The oligarch does not
deny the importance of freedom to gratify one's desires; and the democrat does not deny the importance of
accumulating enough external goods. They disagree about relative importance and relevance, the oligarch appealing to
conditions for accumulating the means and the democrat to the conditions for enjoying the end. Neither side sees that
this is the nature of the dispute; and neither sees that the error in the other side lies in a mistaken conception of the
good.
From this perspective, however, the democratic conception turns out to be more nearly correct than the oligarchic.
Oligarchs are far from ﬁnding the right principles to govern the enjoyment of the end; but

CHAPTER 20 § 236

437

democrats have found some of the correct principles, and simply fail to see when and why they will be correct. Their
conception of political justice is closer to Aristotle's; for his ideal state expresses the conditions in which it would be
reasonable to follow the democratic principles, though not for the democratic reasons.

236. Answers to Puzzles About Justice
Aristotle assumes that a conception of special justice is properly examined by appeal to general justice, and that the
right basis for principles of general justice is a conception of happiness. He infers that the partisans of oligarchic and
democratic justice rely on a mistaken view of happiness. The partisans might therefore reply that their view of justice
does not rest on the teleological ground that Aristotle assumes in his criticism, but on some independent principle that
is not to be tested by Aristotelian general justice.
The oligarch might argue that it is just for people to be rewarded in proportion to their contribution, and the democrat
might argue that it is just for each person to have equal political rights simply because he is a (free, male, native-born)
person. Aristotle looks for a further end, a conception of happiness to support these claims about justice; but the
partisan may reply that Aristotle is looking for the wrong thing. In attributing a goal and a conception of a way of life
to the deviant conceptions of justice, Aristotle ascribes more to them than their partisans have stated.20 Partisans may
reply that he distorts their meaning.
In that case Aristotle challenges the partisans. He offers them a conception of happiness that would support their
views on justice if it were correct, and argues that it is not correct. In doing this he explains the false beliefs in the light
of the true theory (EN 1154a22–5).21 For he shows how we might form a deviant conception of justice through
grasping part of the truth about happiness and the means to it.
Our grasp of the truth is partial partly because of the sort of people we are and our material circumstances. We tend to
be prejudiced in our judgment when our material condition disposes us to favour one side or the other (Pol.
1280a14–16, 1287a41–b3), even though a truer conception of justice would also give us a truer conception of our real
interests. Partisans who reject the Aristotelian diagnosis must show that some plausible principle overlooked by
Aristotle justiﬁes their position. Aristotle's challenge is a legitimate dialectical argument.
Aristotle has appealed to strong dialectic; for his diagnosis of the partisan views rests on his own moral theory, and
therefore on the

438

CHAPTER 20 § 236

principles supporting it. The diagnosis is also an argument for the theory, since the theory is expected to explain
common beliefs and to solve puzzles they raise. The oligarchic and democratic conceptions of justice clearly conﬂict,
and the apparently irresoluble character of the conﬂict may suggest that considerations of justice are either too
indeﬁnite or too partisan to solve the conﬂict. Aristotle concedes that the general commonsense maxims about justice,
equality, and fairness are too indeﬁnite, but he argues that they become deﬁnite enough for the purpose when they are
supported by his theory of general justice and of happiness.
The partisans of different views of justice make the mistake that Aristotle often warns against; they have overlooked
important preliminary questions about justice that arise from their conﬂicts and disagreements.22 Study of the
preliminary questions in the light of Aristotle's moral theory and its foundations helps to resolve the puzzles that
underlie the conﬂicts about justice.

21 The Consequences of Virtue and Vice
237. The Virtues of Character
We began our discussion of the virtues of character by distinguishing eudaimonic virtues—those that promote the
agent's self-realization—from moral virtues—those that promote the good of others.1 Aristotle believes that these are
not two seperate lists of virtues, and that the moral virtues are eudaimonic virtues also. We have followed two stages of
his argument for this claim, in his defence of altruistic friendship, and his extension of altruism from friendship, to
justice. We now come to a third stage, in the defence of the virtues of character as different forms of extended
altruism, and hence of rational self-realization.
If Aristotle simply takes over the list of virtues from common sense, and does not try to show how they promote the
agent's good and the common good, he has not shown that they are genuine virtues, and he has left the sceptic and the
critic unanswered. If, however, he connects the recognized virtues with the good of a rational agent, and with the
common good of her community, then he answers the sceptic and the critic; he relies on strong dialectic, appealing
ultimately to his metaphysical account of the human essence to justify the common beliefs about the virtues.
Aristotle's descriptive sketches of the virtues of character may not initially suggest any appeal to strong dialectic.2 But
his argument rests on some common features of the virtues:
1. They all satisfy the doctrine of the mean and hence must be defensible by the reasoning of the wise person (EN
1107a1–2).
2. They are inseparable, since virtue in the full sense is impossible without wisdom (1144b32–1145a2). Since they
all require wisdom, they will not give conﬂicting advice (MM 1200a5–11).
3. Virtue of character as a whole is the same state of character as general justice (EN 1130a8–13). Each virtue of
character will therefore be a part of general justice, and will aim at the common good.
4. They all aim at the ﬁne (1122b6–7), and hence at the common good.
Each of the later claims explains the earlier ones. The wise person's deliberation focuses each of the virtues on his
conception of his good;

440

CHAPTER 21 § 237

and since he values the good of his community, he focuses the virtues on the common good. This is why the virtues
are aspects of general justice. The common good is central in the wise person's conception of his happiness; since he
forms his character by deliberation from this conception, the common good will be central in the virtues of character.
If concern for the common good is part of the agent's good, we cannot expect to describe the particular virtues
without constant attention to the common good. In a community many of my actions and omissions affect the
common good, and the nature of the community affects the actions open to me, and the ways they will inﬂuence my
happiness. Even those actions that do not directly promote the common good are regulated by it, if I systematically
exclude actions that harm the common good.
Aristotle ascribes concern for the ﬁne to all the virtues, since they all produce actions that are done because they are
ﬁne (1116a11), and for the sake of the ﬁne (1115b12–13). If this concern for the ﬁne includes concern for the
common good, concern for the common good is essential to each virtue.3
Aristotle assumes that if an action or state of character is ﬁne, it thereby beneﬁts others. Conferring a beneﬁt is ﬁne,
and receiving it merely expedient (1168a9–12); that is why it is ﬁner to have friends in our good fortune (1171a25–6),
because it is ﬁne to confer beneﬁts (1171b16). Such active concern for the ﬁne rather than the merely expedient is
characteristic of the virtuous person (1162b34–1163a1, 1169a4–7), and it explains his concern for the common good.
The magniﬁcent person spends his money on objects that provoke competition promoting the common good
(1122b21–2), and ‘does not spend freely on himself, but on common goods’ (1123a4–5).
Such concern for the ﬁne and for the common good is a general feature of the virtuous person.
Hence it is proper for the generous person to give to those he ought to give to, more than to take or avoid taking
from where he ought or ought not. For it is proper to virtue to confer beneﬁt more than to receive it, and to do ﬁne
actions more than to avoid base actions. (1120a9–13)4
Concern for the ﬁne is characteristic of reason (1117a18, 1162b35, 1169a4–6, 1180a4–5, 10–12, EE 1229a1–9), and
especially characteristic of the correct reason that ﬁxes the mean appropriate for each virtue (e.g. 1115b17–20).
Hence the community beneﬁts from the concerted actions of virtuous people.
When everyone is contending towards the ﬁne and straining to do the ﬁnest actions, the community will gain
everything it ought to (deonta), and each

CHAPTER 21 § 238

441

individual will gain the greatest of goods, if that is the character of virtue. (1169a8–11)
In seeking the common good the virtuous person certainly seeks the good of others besides himself, and on some
occasions has to sacriﬁce his own self-conﬁned good to the ﬁne and to the good of others (1117b7–15). But Aristotle
denies that he really sacriﬁces his own good. Though some people may reject the ﬁne because they act on calculations
of expediency, their calculations are wrong, and they simply act on what seems expedient (1169a5–6).
The right kind of self-love requires a true conception of oneself; and if we have this true conception, we will also be
concerned to do ﬁne actions. The virtuous person who gives up his life for his friend or his fellow-citizens does not
sacriﬁce his own interests. On the contrary, the praiseworthy (1169a8) type of self-love requires a character that
pursues the ﬁne.
Such efforts to connect the ﬁne and the common good with the agent's good would be groundless if Aristotle had no
systematic argument to connect eudaimonic with moral virtues. But his claims about self-love, the ﬁne, and the good
of others show that he relies on his systematic argument from the human good to the moral virtues. He intends each
virtue of character to aim at the ﬁne, and therefore at the common good that the wise agent recognizes as part of her
own good.

238. The Particular Virtues and Non-Rational Desires
If Aristotle intends these general claims about the virtues of character, we may still fairly ask if his descriptions of the
virtues reﬂect the general claims.
Aristotle resists the natural suggestion that anyone who is fearless in facing danger is thereby brave.5 Even citizen
soldiers who promote the common good in facing danger, but face it because they want honour and fear disgrace, are
not brave (1116a16–29). Even if someone is ready to sacriﬁce himself for the common good without hesitation, he
may not be brave; for he may not have the right conception of the ﬁne if he values his own life too cheaply
(1117b17–20).
The brave person sacriﬁces his life in the right cause for the sake of the ﬁne. He must care about the common good,
but he must also care about the self-conﬁned elements of his own good. This self-conﬁned concern itself promotes the
common good. For we would all be worse off if we cheerfully faced any life-threatening danger or marched off to war
when we were told to, without a second thought; such carelessness might involve us in hasty adventures from which
we would all lose. Both the

442

CHAPTER 21 § 239

self-conﬁned and the other-regarding aspects of happiness make Aristotle's view of bravery intelligible.
For similar reasons, Aristotle rejects the natural view that people are temperate if they simply restrain their bodily
appetites, and accustom themselves to not minding the loss of some satisfactions. He requires temperate people to
have moderated their appetites, but for the sake of the ﬁne, and as correct reason prescribes (1119a11–20). Such
people are pleased to have moderated their appetites, and displeased at the thought of immoderate pleasures, because
of their view of the ﬁne.
The appetites that concern temperance share an animal character (1118b1–4). Someone who occupies himself with
them is concerned with the sorts of goals that might interest an animal, not with the intrinsic value of distinctively
human characteristics. Hence he will use practical reason only to ﬁnd ways of securing the pleasure at hand, following
his strongest appetite. If he is indifferent to practical reason, he will be indifferent to the arguments from his own good
to the common good, and hence indifferent to the ﬁne (1169a3–6). He will also be positively hostile to the ﬁne and the
common good. Intemperance requires contested goods; and when these are in limited supply, it encourages me to take
them from others. Hence intemperance will be one form of general injustice, and one source of special injustice;
Aristotle remarks that most people are greedy because these are the kinds of goods they pursue (1168b19–21).6
Bravery and temperance, as Aristotle conceives them, involve a normative, not merely a conative conception of
happiness.7 Since a correct normative conception of my own good involves the good of others, the common good, and
the ﬁne, these must also concern the virtues. Bravery and temperance might seem to be purely self-regarding; but in
fact they refer to the ﬁne, and hence to the good of others.

239. The Particular Virtues and External Goods
Generosity and magniﬁcence, the two virtues concerned with money, are not exclusively other-regarding, since they
cover expenditure on the agent himself as well as on other people. But they still pursue the ﬁne (1120a9–15,
1120a23–b4, 1122b6–7), and hence the common good. Concern for the ﬁne does not require me to think about the
common good in all my actions. Virtue requires only that my actions should be regulated by the common good, so that
I will be keen to advance it, and pleased to avoid any self-conﬁned action that conﬂicts with it.
The generous and the magniﬁcent person avoid spending money on

CHAPTER 21 § 239

443

intemperate actions, on ﬂatterers, and on ostentatious displays that appeal only to those who compete with others for
honour and status. Since their use of external goods is regulated by the ﬁne and the common good, they display moral
virtues that also prove to be eudaimonic virtues.8
Magnanimity takes the correct attitude to great honours, and hence to other external goods. The magnanimous person
appropriately demands great honours, but only when he knows he deserves them. He seeks honour when it advances
the common good (1122b21–3); for he wants to be honoured only by the right people, for his virtues (1124a4–12). He
does not regard honour as the supreme good, and so he will not sacriﬁce virtue for honour; for he cares about the
common good, not primarily about being honoured for seeming to advance it.
On the other hand, he does not accept just any danger as a reason for risking his life (1124b6–9); he is ready to
sacriﬁce his life, but only for a properly important cause (1124b24–6). The wise person does not abandon his own selfconﬁned good in favour of the common good, and does not expect the community to ignore the self-conﬁned good of
individuals. Aristotle ascribes to the magnanimous person the virtue that expresses a correct normative conception of
his own good.
A virtue concerned with external goods embodies the right attitude to their role in a virtuous life. The virtuous person
wants wealth for generous and magniﬁcent actions. He wants honour as a sign of mutual respect; for he values his
fellow-citizens' judgment on him, in so far as he thinks they are virtuous, and that by honouring him they show their
respect for him. Mutual respect and honour result from the friendship and goodwill that should be present in virtuous
fellow-citizens. The virtuous person pursues and values the external goods as both instrumental and intrinsic goods,
within the limits set by his conception of his own good and the common good.
The other social virtues—good temper, friendliness, and wit—concern the appropriate attitude of one person to
another in the relatively informal social encounters that are not covered by the speciﬁc obligations of justice, friendship
and the other major virtues (cf. 1127a33–b3). In such encounters virtue requires some self-assertion against others
and some accommodation to others. The virtuous person develops these tendencies to the right extent; and Aristotle
insists that the right extent is to be ﬁxed by ‘the expedient and the ﬁne’ (1126b28–30).
Excessive self-assertion makes us prone to anger and disputes; but fear of failure in competitions of self-assertion
makes us ready to belittle ourselves and to demand less than the appropriate honour. Unwillingness to accommodate
makes us unsociable and ill-humoured; but

444

CHAPTER 21 § 239

excessive accommodation makes us too eager to please. Sometimes apparent eagerness to please conceals willingness
to beneﬁt at another's expense, and someone who makes himself agreeable to me may be aiming at his own advantage;
by pleasing me with jokes that wound you, he may be getting an advantage for himself over both of us. If I am
susceptible to the ﬂatterer or obnoxious joker, I show a weakness in my own character; I am too fond of the sorts of
pleasures that a ﬂatterer offers me, and I am too little concerned with the feelings of the victim of an insulting joke (cf.
1128a33–b1). Vices encourage each other, both in the same person and in other people.
The right attitude in these cases results from proper consideration for myself and for the good of others. Proper
consideration for myself makes me ready to demand honour from others and to be angry with them when they harm
me unjustly; I will not be slavishly pliant (1126a3–8), and I will not understate my own merits (1127b3–7).9 This is the
same sort of self-assertiveness that makes me value special justice in the community. Still, I will be considerate to
others; I will want to be agreeable to them if I am not treated unjustly, and I will want to spare them pain that is
inﬂicted simply for my own or other people's amusement.
If I am concerned for the ﬁne, I will be concerned about the good of the other person; I will not want to cause him
pain and I will want to give him pleasure, except when the pleasure would be contrary to his longer-term interest
(1126b28–1127a6). This same outlook will help the virtuous person to decide when a joke becomes an unwarranted
insult (1126a16–22). Consideration for another person, displayed in gentleness, friendliness, and wit, reﬂects the
general consideration for the common good that we expect in the virtues of character.
These ostensibly minor virtues of character, no less than the others, express Aristotle's theory of the virtues. The
eudaimonic virtues are the states of character that secure a rational agent's happiness by achieving his self-realization.
But his self-realization requires concern for the good of others, and in particular for the common good of the
members of a community. Hence the virtues of character must be moral as well as eudaimonic virtues. They pursue
the common good, because they aim at the ﬁne, and constitute general justice.
If this is so, then one large part of the Ethics that might appear to be merely dialectical turns out to be the strong
dialectic that appeals ultimately to ﬁrst philosophy. The common beliefs are prominent, because Aristotle begins with
them and wants to defend them as far as is reasonable. But he is not conﬁned by them; he examines, arranges, and
criticizes them in the light of his general theory. The account of the virtues is clearly ethics, not metaphysics of ethics,
but it is ethics that relies on metaphysics.

CHAPTER 21 § 240

445

240. Virtue and the Loss of External Goods
Aristotle has undertaken to explain and to justify common beliefs about the moral virtues. The promotion of the
common good or a friend's good is in itself a part of happiness, and the virtuous actions that express this sort of
concern will themselves be actions that constitute a happy life. Other virtuous actions will, if Aristotle is right, promote
happiness instrumentally by providing the right external goods and encouraging the right relations among fellowmembers of a community.
This argument has not yet answered one apparent difﬁculty in common sense. We normally expect a virtuous person
to stick to her moral principles even when they are costly to her. Like Plato's just person, she chooses the virtuous life
despite its penalties. Sometimes this means simply that I am not as well off as I otherwise might have been; sometimes,
however, it may mean that disaster strikes us through no fault of our own. Sometimes, indeed, virtue itself seems to
cause disaster, if it requires us to sacriﬁce our life or our prospects of happiness, for the sake of some moral
requirement. Common sense seems right to assume that the virtuous person is willing to sacriﬁce her own interest to
the requirements of virtue and morality (cf. Rhet. 1359a2–5).
Aristotle cannot agree completely with common sense. For he has argued that the moral virtues are justiﬁed in so far as
they are also eudaimonic virtues. He cannot therefore agree that the choice of virtue is reasonable and yet contrary to
the agent's happiness. On the other hand, he cannot argue that virtue is itself sufﬁcient for happiness; indeed, he
remarks that no one would maintain this view except from the desire to maintain a philosophical thesis without regard
for its plausibility (EN 1096a1–2; cf. 1153b19–21). Happiness requires both the activity of complete virtue and a
complete life (1098a16–20); and both of these components require external goods.10
Unfavourable external conditions impede virtuous activities (1100b29–30), most obviously those characteristic of
magniﬁcence and magnanimity. Moreover, by depriving us of other intrinsic goods besides virtuous action, external
conditions can take away our happiness, as they took away Priam's (1100a5–9). We may suffer Priam's fate despite
being virtuous; but we may also suffer loss of external goods because we are virtuous; bravery may require the brave
person to end his happy life for the sake of acting ﬁnely (1117b9–15).
The moral virtues share their focus on the ﬁne and the common good; and this focus requires the virtuous person to
be inﬂexible about his commitment to virtue. The brave and magnanimous person is ready to sacriﬁce his life on the
right occasion; generous and magniﬁcent people are ready to spend freely, even to risk their own security, in the

446

CHAPTER 21 § 240

appropriate cause. The prospect of losing external goods will not make them shrink from the actions required by the
common good; for they do not think the loss of these goods justiﬁes the sacriﬁce of virtue.
Such inﬂexibility seems to conﬂict with the agent's own good, if his good is not exhausted by promotion of the
common good. Sometimes we may have to choose between virtue and the other goods; and sometimes if we are
virtuous we will actually be more exposed to external hazards. In these cases why should we always choose virtue over
the other goods?
Aristotle agrees that a virtuous person may be happy and then lose his happiness (1101a9–11); but he denies that the
virtuous person will ever be miserable (athlios; see 1100b33–5, 1101a6–8), and denies that he will ever have reason to
choose anything else rather than virtue.
If they are great misfortunes, they oppress and spoil his blessedness, since they involve pain and impede many
activities. And yet, even here what is ﬁne shines through, when he bears many severe misfortunes with good
temper, not because he feels no distress, but because he is noble and magnanimous. And since it is activities that
control life, as we said, no blessed person could ever become miserable, since he will never do hateful and base
actions. For a truly good and intelligent person, we suppose, will bear strokes of fortune suitably, and from his
resources at any time will do the ﬁnest actions he can, just as a good general will make the best use of his forces in
war, and a good shoemaker will produce the ﬁnest shoe he can from the hides given him, and similarly for all other
craftsmen. If this is so, then the happy person could never become miserable. (1100b28–1101a7)
If these claims are correct, virtue must be the dominant component of happiness, so that someone who chooses it
always comes closer to happiness than he could have come by choosing any other good without virtue. But since lack
of external goods prevents us from acquiring and from exercising some virtues, the virtue that is reliably dominant
cannot be complete virtue, but must be the degree of virtue that is in our power; why should this be dominant?
Aristotle cannot expect the virtuous person to consider whether she should sacriﬁce her virtue for other goods; she
refuses to consider this choice. Aristotle insists that a virtue cannot be lost; someone who was willing to abandon a
virtue would simply show that she lacked the sort of inﬂexible and stable state of character that is necessary for virtue
(1105a33). Rather, the virtuous person will have formed a state of character that makes her refuse to give up her virtue
in a crisis; we will not expect her to hesitate and consider carefully on each occasion, any more than we will expect the
brave person to reﬂect about how to face a sudden emergency (cf. 1117a17–22). Why, then, should someone form this
inﬂexible state of character?

CHAPTER 21 § 241

447

241. The Supremacy of Virtue
Aristotle has explained why the virtuous state of character is choiceworthy in itself. A human being has reason to seek
the fullest realization of his capacities as a whole, in so far as they are his capacities as a rational agent, and in so far as
they allow the maximum role for rational agency. I want not merely the results of intelligent rational agency, but also
the rational agency itself, and I will prefer one life over another in so far as it allows a larger role to rational agency.
If I agree with Aristotle, I will not accept a conception of my good that identiﬁes my happiness with being well-born or
blue-eyed or seven feet tall, since none of these goods can be an end for rational agency at all. Nor will I accept a
conception that makes happiness consist in winning bets on games of chance, since the contribution of rational agency
to this end is quite small, and the contribution of chances beyond my control is dominant.
Nor will I accept a conception that allows rational agency a large but purely instrumental role, the sort of role it has in
some intemperate lives. That conception fails to accord to rational agency the place that the human essence requires. In
so far as the virtues form the sort of life that develops and realizes rational agency most fully, they are choiceworthy in
themselves, and the actions that express them are also choiceworthy in themselves.
This argument by itself does not show why the wise person should choose the inﬂexible commitments characteristic of
the virtues rather than the ﬂexible and adaptable attitude that would be readier to compromise for the sake of external
goods. To defend inﬂexibility Aristotle needs to appeal to the rational person's concern with himself as a stable and
persistent rational agent.11 The wise person wants more of his deﬁnite and speciﬁc commitments to persist through his
life, since their persistence will be his persistence. Concern for himself justiﬁes him in forming a relatively ﬁxed
character with determinate and inﬂexible aims.
It still remains to be shown that his ﬁxed and inﬂexible aims should be those that are characteristic of the Aristotelian
virtues. Aristotle argues for these by arguing that promotion of the good of others and of the common good is a
prominent component of the wise person's conception of his own good. The Aristotelian virtues rationally pursue the
common good, and, in moderately favourable external conditions, secure it. They secure it all the better if virtuous
people are inﬂexibly committed to it even in unfavourable conditions. And since inﬂexible commitment, rather than
adaptability to conditions, is in our interest, the virtues do not demand of us a commitment that is contrary to our

448

CHAPTER 21 § 241

interest. Since they attach greater value to the exercise of practical reason in states rationally aiming at the common
good than to the results themselves, they express the wise person's correct conception of what is most important for
him.
It follows that the virtuous person will not count the prospect of further external goods as a reason for deviating from
virtue and the common good. The prospect of honour or inﬂuence or wealth that causes the vices of ﬂattery, vanity,
and honour-loving will not entice the virtuous person, since these vices promise no sufﬁciently large component of his
good. He does not have to resist the temptation to prefer his own happiness to the common good; he sees that the
temptation should not tempt a rational person.
The virtuous person can defend his inﬂexible attitude to virtue and to external goods, by arguing that this attitude
secures his good, in so far as it is up to him; the goods he would obtain by becoming vicious would not make the
change worth his while. I have no reason to become vicious in order to let someone else enjoy external goods; and I
have no reason to compromise my own rational agency so that my later self, having lost some major component of
me, will gain external goods. If Aristotle is right in connecting the persistence of a person with the persistence of his
character, then a good person with a stable character has no reason to sacriﬁce his character to other goods. Such selfsacriﬁce would deny any prospect of happiness to himself.
The virtuous person is not the most stable person possible. The minimalist planner ensures a stable character by
seeking only what he can achieve without danger of loss; but he does not achieve happiness, since happiness is
complete. The virtuous person wants the traits of character that allow him to realize his rational agency in acquiring the
complete good; and these require more than mere stability. But he will have good reason to value rational agency most
highly, and hence good reason to refuse to sacriﬁce it for any other good.12
Study of Aristotle's account of happiness, and of the underlying conception of self and common good, shows how he
can justify one central common belief about virtue. We share with Greek common sense the belief that the virtuous
person is ready to sacriﬁce other goods to observe moral requirements, and the suspicion that such inﬂexibility
requires the sacriﬁce of his own good to morality. Aristotle argues that the common belief is true and the associated
suspicion is false. His account of happiness rests on his conception of a human being's essence as a rational agent. This
conception supports the major recognized virtues, and removes the appearance of conﬂict between morality and
happiness. The examination of common beliefs by appeal to metaphysics and psychology does not merely systematize
them; it does not justify

CHAPTER 21 § 242

449

them quite as they stand; it does better for them than they can do for themselves.

242. Vice in a Political Context
If Aristotle argues that the moral virtues, as he understands them, are a dominant component of a person's happiness,
he should be able to conﬁrm his conclusion by showing that the corresponding vices harm the vicious agent himself
and the community he belongs to. In the Ethics he indicates only brieﬂy (EN ix 4) the sort of harm that results from
vice. In the Politics he argues more fully that the vices of individuals are responsible for some of the basic ﬂaws in nonideal states. Though I have already discussed some of this line of argument in the Politics, especially in connexion with
justice, it is useful to examine it more fully.13
Aristotle intends his moral principles to contribute to empirical political analysis. For his principles rest on claims about
human nature and the function of the city, no less than on common ethical beliefs. Claims about human nature and the
city are not straightforward empirical claims; but something would be seriously wrong if they were totally useless or
misleading in the explanation of actual behaviour by states and individuals. The three empirical books of the Politics,
Books iv–vi, offer to analyse and explain the variety of political systems, and the sources of instability and stability in
them. If Aristotle succeeds, we should come to believe that his ethical principles contribute to understanding and
explanation; and to this extent we should be readier to believe the principles.
Aristotle argues that the variety of constitutions results from different conceptions of justice. The false conceptions are
related to the social and economic conditions of different groups, because people tend to make unjust judgments when
their own interest, as they see it, is at stake (1280a14–22). The structure of a state may embody injustice to such an
extent that it provokes resentment and conﬂict that is not removed by goodwill or generosity on either side.
Aristotle mentions both different conceptions of justice and the different socio-economic composition of different
communities, to explain the difference in political systems.14 He does not mean that a person's or state's moral outlook
is formed quite independently of the social and economic environment. On the contrary, he recognizes—perhaps, as
we have seen, he exaggerates—the effects of occupation and social status on moral outlook and character. And he
recognizes that one or another type of upper and lower class makes a speciﬁc conception of

450

CHAPTER 21 § 242

justice, and a speciﬁc type of political system, easier to form and to maintain.
Aristotle does not infer that moral outlooks are simply epiphenomena with no causal role of their own. Even though
external conditions make people more likely to share one moral attitude rather than another, the moral attitude is still
needed to explain the different political institutions. Moreover, a dominant group in a city can change their views on
justice, and change the political system to suit, even though external conditions remain unchanged. Indeed, one of
Aristotle's purposes in Books v–vi is to show why it is sometimes sensible to change our views on justice. Attitudes to
justice have independent weight as explanations of the difference between political systems.

243. The Variety of Political Systems
Though he takes these features of a state—social, economic, moral, and political—to be the primary grounds for
distinguishing political systems, Aristotle also considers commonly accepted grounds for distinguishing constitutions.
These differentiae mention number of rulers; wealth and poverty; rule of law; consent or force (1295a22–4). Each
differentia has some role in his own analysis, but they are not all of equal value, and none is as important as the
Aristotelian differentiae are supposed to be. Since rich and poor, few and many, tend to hold different conceptions of
justice, the subordinate criteria may be useful indications.
The treatment of democracy and oligarchy illustrates Aristotle's attitude to the subordinate differentiae. Though he
disagrees with those who think democracy and oligarchy are the only two systems worth discussing, he seems to agree
that in some way they are fundamental. Their fundamental feature is the wealth or poverty, not (as commonly believed)
the number, of the ruling group (1279b26–1280a6, 1290a30–b20, 1302a1–2). Wealth or poverty is important because
it disposes us towards the oligarchic or democratic conception of justice. As we have seen, Aristotle thinks democrats
are right to suppose that justice should imply equality for all citizens, and that unequal possession of some kinds of
good is not a relevant basis for inequality; hence they are right to reject wealth as a criterion. Oligarchs, on the other
hand, are right to reject the claims of just any citizen to a share in ruling; but they are wrong to suppose that the good
they have, wealth, is a proper basis for inequality. Wealth and poverty make these mistaken conceptions of justice seem
attractive; and the errors about justice explain the systematically distorted character of the political system.15

CHAPTER 21 § 244

451

Aristotle argues, then, that his criteria are better than others, because none of the others properly identiﬁes the features
of a state that adequately explain its institutions and practices, and none of them distinguishes the different degrees of
justice in different systems. We cannot say that a constitution is just if it follows its laws or if it is ruled by the few or by
the many. Each of these constitutions may very well be unjust; and to decide whether it is or not we must turn to
Aristotle's basic criterion. Aristotle criticizes those partisans of existing constitutions who support their own favoured
constitution as the only just and correct one. His analysis shows why there is something plausible in their view, while at
the same time the view is basically mistaken. This is just what he promises to do with common beliefs.16

244. Vice and Conict
The virtues rest on a true conception of happiness, and so promote the common good. The vices rest on a false
conception of happiness; and since this fails to connect happiness with the common good, the different vices harm the
common good by promoting injustice. In applying his moral theory to the explanation of political variation and
change, Aristotle explores the bad social effects of the vices. Each of the virtues is the virtue it is partly because it is
ﬁne, because it promotes the common good of the community; and each of the vices is vicious and shameful partly
because of the way it harms the common good.
The Politics defends these claims in more detail. Its empirical books (iv–vi) rely on the canon of virtues and vices, and
conﬁrm Aristotle's claim to have found the right canon. If injustice and the other vices have the bad effects that are
displayed in the account of political instability, common sense gives us reasons for agreeing with Aristotle's judgment
that these are indeed vices. The appeal to common sense is not the whole of Aristotle's defence of his theory; but it is a
reasonable conﬁrmation.
Mistaken conceptions of happiness harm the common interest through the types of moral education, formal or
informal, that are practised in some states (1266b35–8, 1318b4, 1324b10, 1333b10). If I have one of the deviant
conceptions of happiness, I have no reason to pursue just action for its own sake as part of their own good; hence I
lack any overriding reason to follow even a correct principle of justice if it beneﬁts another person and seems, judged
by my false conception of happiness, to harm me. Moreover, my belief that justice harms me for someone else's
beneﬁt is quite justiﬁed, if I reach it from a deviant conception of justice and a true conception of happiness.
The combination of these errors weakens commitment to justice.17

452

CHAPTER 21 § 244

The political system loses the necessary conditions for friendship between the citizens. For one important aspect of
friendship in a state is concord about what it is expedient to do (EN 1167b2–4), but in deviant states this concord is
replaced by struggle and competition. The observance of the (supposedly) just policy beneﬁts some at the expense of
others;
and Thrasymachus' description of justice as simply another's good is true of the prevalent conception of justice.
18
If so much injustice is built into the system, and if the prevalent conception of justice encourages a prudent person to
be unjust, these deviant systems encourage injustice. When one side in an oligarchy or democracy try to exclude the
other from political life altogether, or use the judicial system against their opponents, they violate both genuine justice
and oligarchic or democratic justice. But the character of the citizens and the institutions of the state tend to encourage
violations of the prevalent standard of justice.19 Those who have developed the vices that are encouraged in deviant
states will be greedy to win advantage at each other's expense (1167b9–16), and their injustice is a source of discord.20
The discord that results from belief in a conﬂict of interest between citizens is to be avoided in the ideal state (Pol.
1330a16–23). But not all deviant systems even try to avoid it, since their existence depends on the discord that
threatens to destroy them; the partisans of one side try to secure loyalty through shared hostility to the other side.21
They cannot plausibly claim to promote the common interest.
This is the attitude Aristotle sees in those who regard domination of the constitution as a prize of victory, and have no
interest in forming a regime that allows common participation and beneﬁt and is fair to everyone (1296a27–b2). Lack
of justice and friendship is both cause and effect of this attitude to the constitution. When rich and poor ﬁnd that their
aims have nothing in common, they see no common interest; and when they see no common interest, they do not care
about treating each other justly (1295b21–5), but struggle for the contested goods in which they see their whole
happiness. Struggles and conﬂicts in the deviant systems reﬂect these general errors about happiness and justice; and
Aristotle claims that the characteristic vices of oligarchy and of democracy explain the particular forms of conﬂict and
instability to be found in each of these systems.

245. Vice and Aggression
An oligarch aims at the accumulation of wealth; but he wants it not simply for its own sake, but also as a source of
honour. Since he has no

CHAPTER 21 § 246

453

true conception of the nature of happiness to impose a limit on his pursuit of wealth, he thinks greater wealth deserves
greater honour; hence his love of honour (philotimia) produces a competitive attitude (philoneikia). This competitive side
of the oligarchic outlook explains the characteristic injustice of the rich against the poor—wanton aggression (hubris).22
Aggressiveness is a result of vanity, the vice of excess corresponding to magnanimity. The vain person tries to show
that he is magnanimous and deserves honour; but instead of virtue, all he has to display is his good fortune, and this
makes him overbearing and aggressive (EN 1124a29–b2).23
Aggression is different from greed, but the two are often connected (Pol. 1302b5, 1307a5–33).24 When aggressiveness
makes me want to proﬁt at your expense, it causes me to do special injustice; but I can commit either one of
aggression and special injustice without the other. Aggressiveness reﬂects the desire to display my superior status in
one of the most striking ways—by disregarding what is justly due to you and humiliating you with impunity. Part of my
reason may be a desire to show my superiority over the person I humiliate. But I may also humiliate a third party to
convince you of my superiority. The particular intention of humiliating another results from the competitive attitude
that is part of the oligarchic pursuit of honour.25
Aggressive tendencies promote oligarchy and (in extreme cases) tyranny, but also threaten the stability of these
systems, since they cause oppression by the few and resentment in the many. The destructive effect of the character
formed by the system on the system itself is part of the reason for believing that the system is deviant, resting on a false
conception of justice and the other virtues. A genuine virtue should not undermine the system that is founded on the
conception of the good underlying the virtue itself.26
The vices resulting from love of honour and competition are characteristic of the rich, few, and well born. Aristotle's
account of these vices shows both why they should be characteristic of the oligarchic outlook, and how they encourage
the actual behaviour of oligarchies and oligarchs.

246. Vice and Slavishness
The lower classes, in Aristotle's view, are characteristically menial, and so display the slavish attitude of the menial
character.27 A slavish person's outlook would be suitable for him if he were a natural slave. He has never learnt that
anything is worth doing or pursuing apart from what fulﬁls his bodily needs and appetites. The lower classes are often

454

CHAPTER 21 § 246

like slaves, if they have little leisure apart from the pursuit of necessities (1292b25–9, 1318b9–16); and in all
circumstances their slavish outlook pursues the life of mere gratiﬁcation (cf. EN 1095b19–22).
Slavishness results in ungenerosity or illiberality (aneleutheria), the attitude that is unsuited for free citizen (1336b12,
1337b6), and in an ‘abased’ (tapeinon) outlook (1295b18–21, 1315b6, 1337b14–15), turning away from honour to the
exclusive pursuit of one's own gain (1266b40, 1297b6–8, 1318b16–17). These are the people the tyrant likes to
encourage (1313b18–29, b41, 1314a15–17; cf. 1295b5–21). Since they care only about their bodily needs, they can be
persuaded that it is in their interest to submit to superior force, and their sense of honour will not move them to resist.
Increased slavishness should encourage both slavish intemperance, extreme lack of restraint in the pursuit of bodily
satisfaction, and slavish abasement, a diminished sense of honour and dignity. But extreme democracy displays
extreme intemperance without any slavish abasement; and Aristotle does not explain why this happens.
The slavish intemperance of the people in extreme democracies explains their tendency to commit injustice against the
rich, because of the ﬂattery of the demagogues. The tyrant lives a life of gratiﬁcation, and so he is willing to listen to
anyone who will serve him in it, no matter how dishonourable the service may be (1313b32–1314a4). In democracies
the people correspond to the tyrant and the demagogues to the ﬂatterers (1304b20–1305a7; cf. 1274a3–11,
1292a13–38). Though demagogues can arise in different sorts of constitutions, including oligarchy (1305b22–39), they
are most readily accepted in extreme democracies because they ﬂatter the demos.
Intemperate people pursuing their own gratiﬁcation are an easy prey for ﬂatterers (EN 1121a30–b10).28 Since the
demos are slavishly intemperate, they care only about gratifying their appetites, and so they are attracted by unjust
demagogic measures. The demagogues enrich the demos unjustly, by conﬁscating property from the rich, imposing
heavy levies on them, and attacking them in the courts. Aristotle thinks such disregard for justice is characteristic of
slavish people who have the leisure and resources to satisfy their slavish appetites. Such a democracy relaxes the
normal and proper restraints over women and slaves (1313b32–8, 1319b27–32), so that everyone can live
intemperately, and all restrictions on living as one pleases are removed.29
If this is the character of the people in extreme democracies, why do they not also display slavish abasement? Normally
the person with a slavish and menial character is little concerned with his honour or status; if he can gratify his
appetites he will not complain. A tyrant should apparently be pleased to maintain an idle proletariat, gratiﬁed by bread

CHAPTER 21 § 246

455

and circuses. But this is not how Aristotle describes the tyrant. To neutralize the demos the tyrant tries to reduce their
intemperance, by making them poor and hard-working (1313b18–29). He does not assume that the most slavish
demos will be the most intemperate. Nor does Aristotle think so; indeed he thinks a poor and hard-working demos is
the best kind (1292b25–1293a10, 1318b6–27), though he acknowledges that extreme poverty makes someone abased
and ready to be ruled as a slave (1295b18–21).
Aristotle could not plausibly claim that extreme democracy causes slavish abasement. Far from being ready to be
manipulated in return for bread and circuses, the demos in this system show the keenest awareness of their own status
and honour. They insist on greater equality for all citizens, and punish anyone who compromises the dignity of the
people. Though individual members of the demos may not be competitive in their private aims, they are collectively
concerned with their honour—indeed too concerned for Aristotle's liking.
Aristotle assumes that menial work makes a character menial; and this is why he thinks menial workers have no place
in the ideal state. Moreover, he thinks the bad condition of some democracies is to be explained by the menial
character of the citizens. But unfortunately (for Aristotle's theory) citizens of extreme democracies do not display the
menial character that Aristotle expects. If this is so, then menial work by itself cannot degrade someone's character in
the way Aristotle claims. He recognizes that citizens of democracies are concerned for honour and justice, and insist on
running their own lives.
If Aristotle has been inﬂuenced more than he should have been by his views about the effects of menial occupations,
he has been inﬂuenced less than he should have been by his account of the democratic outlook. He acknowledges that
freedom is a mark of democracy, and that the democrat conceives freedom as living as one pleases. He describes the
character formed by this belief in freedom as slavish, because he thinks the belief explains why democracies reject
restraints on gratiﬁcation. He unfairly overlooks the other likely effect of the democratic belief in freedom—refusal to
be ruled by someone else more than is necessary (1317b10–17). Since a person inﬂuenced by this outlook is not likely
to be slavishly abased, the demos in extreme democracies are self-assertive.
Aristotle must in consistency recognize the possibility of countervailing inﬂuences that may prevent the normal effects
of menial work.30 In democracy the countervailing inﬂuence is the outlook resulting from the democratic conception of
justice. Someone who grows up with this outlook thinks he is justly entitled to consideration in distribution of goods,
and regards it as a slight and dishonour if he is deprived of his equal share in government.

456

CHAPTER 21 § 246

Aristotle's belief in the destructive effects of menial labour leads him to predict that the demos will be slavish and
abased; but his account of the democratic belief in freedom and independence should lead him to predict that the
demos will be self-assertive. He speaks as though the ﬁrst prediction is fulﬁlled, but the evidence he cites supports the
second prediction.
These results conﬁrm two previous judgments about Aristotle's theory. We argued that his views about menial labour
should be rejected, and that he undervalues the conception of freedom as independence and living as one pleases.31
Both these objections focus on errors that are evident in the criticism of democracy. Since these errors cause such
damage to Aristotle's other claims, we have further reason for concluding that his theory is better off without them,
and that they are not warranted by his central political principles.

247. Instability in Political Systems
After explaining, in Book iv, why there are different constitutions and what they are, Aristotle turns, in Book v, to a
discussion of a feature of them that would immediately strike any Greek student—their tendency to change into one
another as a result of peaceful developments or as a result of violent revolution arising from conﬂict within the state.
Many constitutional changes result from features of a state quite apart from its constitution.32 Aristotle insists in the
Ethics that rational planning cannot expect to secure every necessary condition of the happy life, and that some of its
conditions are exposed to chance and to external conditions. Similarly, political scientists must recognize the role of
external circumstances in political change, so that they can more realistically plan for the preservation or change of a
particular system.33
Still, these external conditions do not fully explain political change. Change depends on the nature of the constitution
itself and of the people who live under it, and especially on their relation to justice and the common interest. The
character of the people affects the form of the constitution, and the constitution in turn affects them; the laws explicitly
reward some people over others, and one constitution suits one type of character more than it suits another. The
effects of the constitution may be deep enough to survive an actual change of constitutions, so that the habits and
characters encouraged by an oligarchy survive under a democracy (1292b11–21). The interaction of characters and
constitutions supports Aristotle's advice to states to attend to the characters and outlooks of their citizens.
Aristotle argues that constitutional changes are the results of the vices

CHAPTER 21 § 248

457

encouraged by the unjust aspects of each constitution.34 He argues that deviant conceptions of justice fail to secure the
common good, both because they rest on false conceptions of the good, and because they are systematically biased
towards the good of some people against the good of others.
Admittedly, the dominance of such a conception of justice does not imply instability and conﬂict; people may either be
deceived into thinking their interests are being promoted, or apathetic about asserting their interest, or persuaded that
their efforts will be fruitless. Still, Aristotle claims that in so far as people recognize their interest and think they can do
something about it, they will ﬁnd legitimate grievances in the political systems controlled by deviant conceptions of
justice. Moreover, the deviant conceptions will encourage the pursuit of unjust gain, and so will provoke both justiﬁed
and unjustiﬁed revolts and challenges.

248. Virtue and Political Stability
The Ethics describes the virtues of character that achieve happiness in the right external conditions; and the Politics
describes the external conditions and the community in which the virtues have their proper result. Aristotle, however,
does not recommend the virtues only for these conditions and this community; he believes that the virtuous person
makes the best of the circumstances (1332a19–27), and that virtue is worth our while even in bad conditions.
In bad conditions we cannot exercise the virtues properly, and so we may be unable to acquire them; but still, Aristotle
thinks, we should be as virtuous as we can be in the circumstances. The virtues express a person's decision to guide his
life by his rational agency, and to follow the same principles even if he lacks the external goods necessary for happiness;
and this is the dominant constituent of his happiness even in unfavourable conditions.35
The Politics shows that this claim needs some explanation. What virtues should we try to cultivate as far as we can?
Should we aim at the virtues of a man or at the virtues of a citizen in a particular political system? The second type of
virtue is (for all Aristotle says) fully achievable in actual conditions, while the virtue of a man is not; but that hardly
seems a reason for renouncing the virtue of a man in favour of the virtue of a citizen. Aristotle claims that in bad
conditions the good person will not give up the virtue that is left to him. The virtue that justiﬁes such inﬂexibility is the
virtue that afﬁrms the primacy of rational agency; and this is the virtue of a man.

458

CHAPTER 21 § 248

Aristotle implies, then, that if the virtue of a citizen conﬂicts with the virtue of a man, we should give up the virtue of a
citizen. He believes, however, that this is only a logical, not a practical, possibility. He is right to believe this if the best
way to cultivate the virtue of a man, as far as we can, is to cultivate the virtue of a citizen in the political system we live
in. Part of human virtue consists in the right relations to fellow-citizens; and some of these relations are promoted by
the virtues corresponding to each system.
On the other hand, Aristotle admits that both tyranny and extreme democracy tend to encourage degraded and vicious
attitudes and practices in citizens (e.g. 1311a8–28, 1313b32–1314a29). As Plato argues, wise people are better off
without the type of character that is needed for success in a democracy (Rep. 496c5–e2), because (Plato supposes) it
excludes the practice of genuine virtue. Even in less thoroughly bad systems the city rewards and encourages love of
honour, competitiveness, extravagance, meanness, insolence, abasement, and so on. Aristotle seems to violate his own
principles, if he advises us to be good citizens in these conditions. At best, his advice seems to encourage uncritical
acceptance of ‘my station and its duties’. Bradley argues:
To the question, How am I to know what is right? the answer must be, By the aisthêsis of the phronimos; and the
phronimos is the man who has identiﬁed his will with the moral spirit of the community, and judges accordingly.36
In a bad constitution, encouragement of the virtue of a citizen seems to support active complicity in vice.
This objection misunderstands Aristotle's conception of the virtue of a citizen that is relative to a political system.
Justice and temperance relative to an oligarchy are not justice and temperance as oligarchs conceive them, but the
degree of justice and temperance that are consistent with the preservation of an oligarchy. Aristotle believes that these
will actually tend to preserve a fairly reasonable oligarchy (1310a19–22); he implies that an oligarchy that is
undermined by the observance of oligarchic justice does not deserve to survive. The virtues of a citizen are not tactics
for adaptation to the regime, but the proper way to exercise the genuine virtues in these political systems.
Aristotle believes that since injustice is a source of instability, justice will restore some degree of stability to a state. The
more just the state becomes, the more the citizens will develop the virtues relative to that political system; hence the
virtues relative to the system will be the best that we can do in those conditions to approach genuine virtue.37
This argument implies that some devices tending to restore stability to a state also tend to make it more just, since some
types of instability

CHAPTER 21 § 248

459

result from injustice. But injustice by itself is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for instability; and, similarly, greater
stability will be neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for greater justice. We are right to pursue greater stability for a political
system only if we attack the speciﬁc type of instability that results from injustice.
Aristotle compares the politician to a doctor who advises patients who refuse to do what is needed for complete health
(1288b10–21).38 The politician must assume that this particular non-ideal system is to remain in being.39 But Aristotle
does not imply that a deviant system always can or should be preserved, any more than all a doctor's patients can or
should be kept alive.40
Nor does the politician simply give advice on ways to protect the constitution from change.41 If he did that, he might
advise oligarchs to demoralize the poor, or democrats to eliminate the rich by judicial murder, or tyrants to divide and
discourage the people more thoroughly. Aristotle rejects these popular, and (for all he says) sometimes effective,
devices for maintaining a regime (1309b18–1310a2).42 Instead he recommends the cultivation of the virtues that are
contrary to its distinctive vices (1319b37–1320a4). He advises deviant states not merely on ways to achieve stability,
but on ways to achieve justice.
This practical advice is meant to show how Aristotle's own conception of justice and the other virtues explains,
justiﬁes, and corrects the common beliefs. We tend to believe a political system is better if it is more just, but this belief
seems to conﬂict with our experience of justice. For democratic and oligarchic constitutions may well seem to be worse
the more thoroughly they incorporate their favoured conceptions of justice; and these conceptions of justice also seem
to conﬂict. Hence a survey of common beliefs and normal political practice may shake our conﬁdence about what
justice is and about whether it is good for a state.
Aristotle replies that the oligarchic and democratic conceptions of justice are false. We ﬁnd the true conception of
justice from the true account of the state, hence from ethical theory, hence from the correct conception of human
nature. The true conception of justice shows that the best democratic and oligarchic conceptions are not the most
democratic and oligarchic, but the most just (cf. 1320a2–4). The ideal state and its true conception of justice provide
the norm for other states, even though they cannot fully realize it (1296b2–12). Common sense, therefore, contrary to
initial appearances, supports Aristotle's claim that justice promotes the common interest. His technical and therapeutic
advice is part of the argument for his conception of justice and the other virtues.
Aristotle seeks to mitigate the distinctive character of a particular type

460

CHAPTER 21 § 249

of regime, and so disagrees with the advice of single-minded partisans (1320a2–4). His advice seeks to reduce the error
implied in the conception of justice underlying a particular constitution, without removing the error altogether by
removing the constitution. Hence the advice presupposes the truth of Aristotle's account of justice; it does not involve
simply splitting the difference between common beliefs.
Aristotle's suggested modiﬁcations of democracy are not intended to add oligarchic elements, which would simply add
further injustices.43 Each deviant system rests on a partial conception of justice that results in consideration of only
some of the interests that ought to be considered. The remedy for this bias is to pay particular attention to the interests
that are not primarily served by the system.44 That is the way to bring the state closer to justice, which is in the common
interest, and hence is in the interest of the dominant and of the defeated class (1320a35–b4).45
To achieve the appropriate concord and harmony in the state, Aristotle insists on the importance of the right kind of
education to suit the laws and the constitution.46 Though this education, and hence the corresponding virtue, must be
relative to the constitution, it is not simply a support for the status quo. It ought to include the virtues, in so far as these
are consistent with the maintenance of the existing constitution; and since the virtues will add up to general justice they
will be in the common interest. The Aristotelian virtues are found to be appropriate not just for the ideal state in its
favourable conditions, but also for non-ideal states in more realistic conditions.47
Aristotle recommends the virtues as sources of stability and of other beneﬁts for a state. When he stresses the
importance of justice and the common advantage (1320a11–17), resulting in concord (1306a9–12, 1310a2–12), he
recommends the virtues to common beliefs. This is not the only recommendation that can or should be offered for the
virtues; but Aristotle sees that it is an important part of a dialectical argument for them.

249. Stability and the Middle Class
Aristotle argues that the best non-ideal state will have a large middle class, between the extremes of wealth and poverty,
and that the constitution should give this class a large political role. He even appeals to the ethical doctrine of the mean
to support his advocacy of the intermediate class. The ethical doctrine is misapplied, and Aristotle's argument may well
appear to be mere propaganda dressed up with an appearance of theory.48 But since he intends to argue from
reasonable theoretical assumptions, we should examine his argument, if we are to

CHAPTER 21 § 249

461

evaluate the theory on which the argument is supposed to rest. We should hesitate to take Aristotle's word for it if he
asserts that his theory justiﬁes his particular recommendation; and often this is all the better for the theory.
Aristotle argues that a large middle class reduces tension between the classes in the state. He suggests that the middle
class will avoid the competitive and aggressive tendencies associated with extreme wealth, and also the slavish
abasement resulting (allegedly) from extreme poverty (1295b13–25). If he is right about the effects of extreme wealth
and poverty, we might agree that it is desirable to reduce the number of the honour-loving rich and the slavish poor, to
reduce their inﬂuence on the constitution. Aristotle will then be right to claim that many citizens should be rich enough
to
belong to the middle class; both democracy and oligarchy will be better off without extremes of wealth and poverty.
49
But this reasonable argument is not exactly an argument for Aristotle's political recommendation. For why is it better
to have three grades rather than two or one? If it is good for the state to have many citizens at the level of the middle
class, it does not follow that they should constitute a middle class—that there should be extremely rich and extremely
poor citizens above and below them. In fact, Aristotle's remarks suggest that if extreme wealth and poverty are bad,
they will still be bad (though their bad effects will be reduced) in a state with a large middle class; it is not clear how the
argument supports three classes. The class structure Aristotle prefers seems inferior, in the light of his own arguments
against extreme wealth and poverty, to restrained democracy at a high material level; this would be a democratic
variation on the polity.
The arguments that allegedly support the middle class turn out to be arguments for something different. Aristotle
argues that a state should reduce the extent of social and economic inequality, but seems to be committed to one class,
whereas he takes himself to be arguing for three classes. To justify his own recommendation he needs to rule out the
one-class alternative. Presumably he might argue it is not worth considering as a practical solution. If some
considerable degree of inequality must often be accepted, then (he might argue) the best way to avoid the ill effects of
inevitable inequality is to ensure a strong middle class. But these claims need further defence; it is not fair to assume
without argument that the one-class alternative is impractical, or that the good effects of the middle class compensate
for the bad effects of inequality. The further premisses needed to justify Aristotle's recommendation are themselves
open to doubt.
Examination of Aristotle's argument allows us to identify more

462

CHAPTER 21 § 250

clearly the empirical premisses that connect his ethical principles with his practical recommendations. In this case, no
less than in his exclusion of menial workers and his defence of private property, Aristotle's empirical premisses are
highly dubious, and the empirical parts of the Politics do not support them. We are free to draw different conclusions
from his ethical principles.
The tendency of Aristotle's empirical over-conﬁdence in these cases is strikingly uniform. All the recommendations
that rest on the dubious premisses tend to support wealth and inequality against the claims of the radical democracy
familiar to Aristotle. It is unlikely that Aristotle's own political preferences and prejudices play no role in his
interpretation of the empirical evidence, and in his failure to look for the empirical evidence he needs. Since his political
preferences encourage his empirical over-conﬁdence, they affect his interpretation of his moral and political principles.
We should not infer that the principles themselves reﬂect the same preferences and prejudices. On the contrary; we
have found that the principles rest on reasonable grounds that are independent of Aristotle's own prejudices; and
attention to these grounds allows us to expose the prejudices.

250. The Defence of Private Property
A further speciﬁc recommendation allows us to test several of Aristotle's theoretical principles, and illustrates the
difﬁculties in reaching conclusions about political practice from them. Though Aristotle denies that the state or the
citizen should aim at the accumulation of wealth, and though he forbids the citizens to engage in commercial activity,
he insists that they should hold private property, and that its abolition would be a serious harm and injustice to them.
We can fairly ask if Aristotle really justiﬁes his defence of private property by appeal to his principles. We should also
ask if a state allowing private property is free of the sources of instability that Aristotle criticizes in the deviant systems;
for in measuring deviant systems by this criterion, he licenses us to apply it to his own ideal state.
In his defence Aristotle can appeal ﬁrst to his conception of happiness. Though he rejects the democratic conception
of happiness as the sort of gratiﬁcation that is secured by living as we please, he must himself attach considerable value
to freedom and independence, as the sources of individual initiative. The free person, unlike the slave, is not
constrained by necessity, and in his life he is independent enough for his rational judgment and choice to make some
difference to what he does.50

CHAPTER 21 § 250

463

Aristotle appeals to these goods in his arguments to show that public ownership (of the sort advocated in Plato's
Republic) is inferior to the friendly sharing of private property (1263a27–40).
He thinks private property is better than public ownership because it allows me to retain the enormous pleasure of
thinking something is exclusively my own. This pleasure results from the self-love that is natural and human, and not
to be condemned.
Further, it is unbelievably more pleasant to count something as our special possession. For each person's love of
himself is not pointless, but a natural tendency. While selﬁshness is quite rightly blamed, it is not love of oneself, but
excessive self-love; and the same distinction applies to love of money, since practically everyone loves himself and
loves money. (1263a40–b5)
The sense of exclusive possession is an important support for the sense of freedom and independence sought by a
rational agent.
Aristotle claims that the pleasure we get from helping our friends depends on our having something of our own at our
disposal that we can usefully give them (1263b5–7). He suggests that we also need private property to leave room for
the actions characteristic of other virtues; for temperance presupposes wives belonging to other men, and generosity
presupposes some property to be generous with (1263b7–14). This belief in the value of exclusive possession makes
the friendship in Plato's city seem watery by comparison with private and particular friendships (1262b7–24).
Aristotle quite fairly assumes that if I have my own supply of external goods under my own control, my choice and
decision determine what happens to it. If I do not control it, I must depend on someone else for the necessities that I
need and for goods that I can give to the recipients of my generosity. But such dependence conﬂicts with the initiative
that a rational agent needs if she is to make a difference with her decision and action. Even if the result of private
generosity is the very same pattern of distribution that the wise legislator would prescribe, the fact that it results from
the private generosity of many people is a further good feature of it.51
Private property should also, in Aristotle's view, answer one of the demands of special justice. For special justice is
intended to protect self-conﬁned interests, so that the state does not impose on any citizen an unreasonable degree of
sacriﬁce for the beneﬁt of other citizens. Since the virtuous person's good consists in more than his purely selfconﬁned goods, justice need not assure him a higher level of self-conﬁned goods than he could achieve under any
other arrangement; he will legitimately accept some sacriﬁce for the sake of the common good that is also part of his
own good. However, he will not accept the neglect of his self-conﬁned interest beyond the point where his own
interest justiﬁes it.

464

CHAPTER 21 § 251

The self-conﬁned aspects of a person's good imply that he is not simply a natural resource for promoting other
people's interest; that is the status of a slave.52 Since part of his good consists in taking initiatives in the distribution of
external goods, special justice should assure to everyone not only the external goods he needs to keep himself alive in
moderate afﬂuence, but also the goods he needs to support the initiatives he takes in his leisure. Hence Aristotle will
not think the demands of justice are satisﬁed if everyone simply gets what he needs, as far as this can be achieved
without reference to the legitimate demand for protection of initiatives. This protection is secured by private property.

251. Objections to the Defence of Private Property
Aristotle's defence of private property appeals to quite basic principles of his ethical and political theory. But we should
not assume too readily that these principles support conclusions quite as speciﬁc as those he draws. It is not clear that
private property is even desirable in the ideal city. The citizens are ready to resign the task of moral education to the
state, and to accept their own moral education as an expression of the common interest that they identify with their
own. Why should they not take the same attitude to the distribution of external goods?
On this view, if external goods are distributed in accordance with need, a virtuous person participates in the action of
the state, and so does not think some signiﬁcant initiative has been removed from him. Aristotle can apparently rely on
the argument he uses about moral education; the citizen willingly accepts the state's action, which is also an expression
of his own rational design. Why should someone demand individual initiative in private generosity more than in moral
education?
Aristotle might claim that the two cases are different. A virtuous person's own rational preferences will require public
education, since he will want himself and others to have been trained for the virtues without which the rest of the ideal
city will not secure happiness. This is too important to be left to unregulated private initiative. Private property,
however, in an ideal city is a rather different matter. Here there is nothing to be lost and something to be gained by
allowing individual initiative. An individual's own self-love and pleasure in what is exclusively his own can be used to
good effect, to strengthen friendly relations and not as a threat to them.
Happiness, on this view, requires an individual to attach the right weight to the common interest, but also to protect his
self-conﬁned interest. Public moral education and private property reﬂect these two aspects of a person's interest. In
the ideal state they support each other.

CHAPTER 21 § 251

465

Public moral education encourages the desire to use private property in the right way; and the right use of it
strengthens the friendship that is needed to maintain concern for the common interest.
Aristotle's own account of human nature, however, may not support his claims about property. He argues that Plato's
abolition of private property conﬂicts with basic tendencies in human nature, and will create quarrels and dissensions,
destroying concord in the ideal city, no less effectively than greed and competition destroy it in deviant cities. But
Aristotle's arrangements seem to encourage the natural tendency to greed, cupidity, and competition. Aristotle's
criticism of deviant systems exposes the destructive effects of these tendencies, and the abolition of private property
might seem a small price to pay for their removal.
Aristotle might answer that moral education will prevent any dangerous growth of these tendencies if private property
is allowed; but then why should moral education not remove the tendencies to quarrels and dissensions that are
supposed to result from abolition of private property? Arguments about moral education counter arguments about
human nature; and neither claim seems more legitimate than the other.
Aristotle himself gives us some reason to argue that he puts too much weight on moral education, and too little weight
on the effects of actual concern with private property. He implies that it is folly to pretend we can talk ourselves out of
deeply ingrained habits; for he admits that generous people may be worse than others at managing their assets (EN
1120b4–6, 14–20), and that the process of acquisition tends to make people more acquisitive and less generous
(1120b11–14). More important, his own refusal to allow citizens to be menial workers seems to assume that the work
itself is corrupting, beyond the inﬂuence of any moral education.53 In his defence of private property, by contrast,
Aristotle seems to take very little account of the motives that are encouraged by the objective nature of accumulation
and possession.
It would be unwise, however, to rest our case against Aristotle's defence of private property on the claim that he
expects too much of moral education in this case. For we might argue that he is nearer the truth here than he is when
he assumes that menial workers are beyond the help of moral education. If we are more optimistic than he is in that
case, we should not be too ready to accuse him of over-optimism about private property.
Citizenship for menial workers would beneﬁt the city enough to justify the risks. Is the same true of private property?
Are its beneﬁts so great and so special to it that the ideal state ought to accept the risks? Aristotle appeals to the value
of freedom and individual initiative. But in the ideal state it is not clear that private property is needed to secure

466

CHAPTER 21 § 252

these goods. The citizen contributes his own deliberation to the deliberation of the community about the common
good; and these deliberations should take account of the self-conﬁned good of each citizen.
Since the political institutions of this city require this exercise of individual initiative, it is not clear why private property
should be needed as well; though it may be a useful expedient for encouraging individual initiative in inferior political
systems, it seems to be superseded in the best system.54 Aristotle urges that a person should develop a conception of
himself as an individual, a source of desires, interests, and claims, distinct from those of other individuals. But it is hard
to see why, in the ideal state, the desirable sort of independence should require exclusive ownership.
If this is true, then Aristotle's principles about friendship, justice, and freedom do not support private property in the
ideal state. He fails to take proper account of the ideal character of the ideal state. He properly urges the beneﬁts that
might, in some conditions, be secured by private property, and properly insists that the ideal state ought to secure these
beneﬁts; but he does not see that it could secure them without private property. He thinks his ethical principles justify a
more deﬁnite recommendation than in fact they seem to justify. If Aristotle's principles do not support his speciﬁc
recommendations about property, then our doubts about his recommendations need not undermine our conﬁdence in
his principles.

252. Moral and Political Theory in Aristotle's System
We have now seen where the Ethics and Politics rely on ‘strong’ dialectic, introduced in Metaphysics iv to fulﬁl the tasks
for which ‘pure’ dialectic proves inadequate. Pure dialectic follows the prescription of the Topics in picking its premisses
from among the common beliefs, leaving the interlocutor free to accept or reject them; its conclusions express a
systematic and consistent account of the common beliefs, but do not pretend to correct them, or to replace them with
objective principles.
Strong dialectic also relies on common beliefs. Since a dialectical argument, strong no less than weak, seeks to lead us
from what is known to us to what is known by nature, the argument must begin from premisses that we can accept,
and must continue to rely on them as the argument proceeds. Here as elsewhere, dialectic follows the pattern of the
Platonic dialogue, where the reﬂective assent of the interlocutor is always required. Strong dialectic, however, conﬁnes
itself to those premisses we have strong reason, apart from the range of common

CHAPTER 21 § 252

467

beliefs currently being considered, to take to correspond to independent reality. The argument to show that a premiss
is privileged in this way is different in different cases.
The basic privileged premisses belong to ﬁrst philosophy, described in Metaphysics iv; some premisses cannot be denied
unless we are to make ourselves incapable of thought and speech about any persisting subject. The privileged
premisses derived from Metaphysics vii–ix rest on general assumptions about the nature of the world and the task of
explanation; while we could deny them without the crippling effects described in Metaphysics iv, we could not deny them
without losing the explanations and the types of understanding that result from Aristotle's metaphysical outlook. Once
these privileged premisses are secured by metaphysical argument, Aristotle uses them to support his conception of the
soul and the human essence; and he uses this conception as the basis of his ethical theory.
The justiﬁcation, however, does not go only one way. The metaphysical and psychological claims are defensible
independently of the ethical common beliefs, and hence provide some external justiﬁcation for Aristotle's ethical
theory. Without form, matter, essence, soul, and rational agency we could not appropriately explain or understand the
phenomena that we need to explain. But if these metaphysical and psychological claims were diametrically opposed to
our basic ethical beliefs, we would have to reject something; and why should we give up our basic ethical beliefs? We
would need some reason for thinking them less warranted than the competing beliefs; and Aristotle's arguments give
us no reason for thinking so. A diametrical opposition would raise justiﬁed doubts about all the opposed beliefs. When
we ﬁnd that these doubts are unwarranted, we help to justify the non-ethical as well as the ethical beliefs.
The cumulative force of Aristotle's arguments is not conﬁned to ethics, narrowly conceived. We have tried to take
seriously his claim that ethical inquiry is part of political science; and we have looked for a continuous line of argument
in the Ethics and Politics. We have found that Aristotle is largely justiﬁed in his claims, and that his ethical theory is
properly completed in his political theory.
Moreover, his political theory is not merely ideology, depending for its premisses on the special assumptions of one or
another political system. On the contrary, Aristotle has a systematic philosophical argument; for the Politics transcends
mere ideology to the extent that it relies on ethical theory, and ethical theory transcends mere common beliefs to the
extent that it relies on psychology and metaphysics. Aristotle's dialectical method is capable, therefore, of ﬁnding
results that we have reason to believe are true, not merely coherent with common

468

CHAPTER 21 § 252

beliefs. The capacity of his ethical theory to explain political phenomena and to justify the most important common
beliefs is a legitimate dialectical argument in its favour.

253. The Evaluation of Aristotle's Claims
In these ways the Politics conﬁrms the expectations we have formed in our examination of the Metaphysics, De Anima,
and Ethics. A proper understanding of Aristotle's method allows us to understand the structure of his theory better
than we might otherwise have understood it. Equally, we are conﬁrmed in believing that the method is sound if we ﬁnd
that it yields well warranted conclusions.
We should not be surprised, then, to ﬁnd that the argument of the Ethics and Politics is dialectical, and that sometimes
Aristotle claims more than pure dialectic would allow him. The difference between pure dialectic and strong dialectic is
reﬂected in the appeals to human nature and the human essence; and these appeals determine the direction of the
argument. The order of topics is the order that Aristotle thinks most suitable for a dialectical argument from what is
known to us; but he selects the common beliefs that ﬁt his systematic argument.
Aristotle thinks strong dialectical argument is no less possible in ethics than elsewhere. Knowledge of a human being as
essentially a rational agent is the basis of an account of the human good and of responsible rational agency from which
the rest of the account of virtue is derived. When we understand the place of rational agency in the human essence, we
can describe the complete good and identify its dominant component. When we have justiﬁed ‘the most and the most
important’ ethical common beliefs, we have shown that ethics is a part of philosophy secured by strong dialectic. At the
same time we have defended in one important area the claim of strong dialectic to be a method of philosophical
argument that can justify claims to knowledge of an independent reality.
The result of approaching Aristotle from this point of view should not be uncritical acceptance of his conclusions. For
sometimes we can see that they rest on prejudice, or on a disputable assessment of empirical evidence, or on an appeal
to common beliefs with no broader support. We have seen that this is true in Aristotle's defence of a restrictive
qualiﬁcation for citizenship, of private property, and of a mixed constitution allowing predominance to the middle
class. In all these cases we can see that Aristotle's theory proves less than he wants, and that dubious assumptions are
needed to ﬁll the gaps.
Discovery of these weaknesses may properly strengthen our conﬁdence

CHAPTER 21 § 252

469

in the general soundness of Aristotle's method and doctrine. For since his general principles commit us to something
less speciﬁc and more plausible than he wants, we need not reject the general principles because of doubts about the
conclusions he draws.55 If we examine Aristotle's arguments to ﬁnd those that rely on strong rather than weak dialectic,
we ﬁnd some grounds for criticism of his conclusions.
We should not conclude that Aristotle's principles are too unspeciﬁc to yield any interesting conclusions or to justify
any distinctive moral and political recommendations. His conception of happiness as self-realization relies on his
conception of the human essence; and it supports the claims for friendship, and thereby the account of citizenship,
moral education, and the proper extent of individual freedom and state action. The argument relies partly on
assumptions that are capable of being false; but with weak and reasonable empirical assumptions it is hard to deny all
force to his argument. While the warranted conclusions of Aristotle's philosophical system are less speciﬁc than he
sometimes takes them to be, they are not so general as to be uncontroversial. Aristotle's own method of argument
shows us a fruitful way to conduct the appropriate controversy.

22 Reconsiderations
254. Aristotle's Silences
It may be helpful to readers who have tried to follow the argument of this book if I review some of its main claims,
and comment brieﬂy on some of the questions that they raise. In particular, I will try to distinguish some of the
different claims I have argued for, and suggest how they do or do not depend on each other. While I think the main
arguments of the book support each other, and that the detailed discussion supports the main arguments, I do not
think it all forms a single package that has to be taken or left as a whole; and in recognizing some objections to some of
my claims, I would like to see how far the force of these objections really spreads.
I have explored Aristotle's conception of the status of ﬁrst principles, and of the sort of argument he thinks can be
given for them. I have suggested that the conception developed in Metaphysics iv expresses a quite signiﬁcant change of
mind from the view in Aristotle's earlier works, and that this conception underlies his argument in psychology, ethics,
and politics.
One might wonder why Aristotle says so little about all this. Though he certainly introduces ﬁrst philosophy, he does
not say in general terms what an argument has to be like if it belongs to ﬁrst philosophy; and he never asks if any of his
psychological or ethical principles can be defended by this sort of argument. He never explicitly raises the main
questions that have occupied us in Part III. This might suggest that I have raised the wrong questions, and that
Aristotle does not hold the views I have attributed to him.
Aristotle's silence partly reﬂects his rather narrow conception of what is relevant to a particular discussion. In his
inquiries into, say, physics or ethics, he quite often alludes to an issue only to dismiss it as inappropriate to the present
discussion.1 In refusing to discuss these issues at length, he does not always mean that they are irrelevant, or that our
view on them makes no difference to our view of the subject under discussion. It certainly makes quite some
difference to our views on physics if we do not believe in change, and it may make some difference to our views on
ethics if we hold a Platonic rather than an Aristotelian view of the soul. Aristotle does not deny this. But he thinks it
better to

CHAPTER 22 § 254

471

assume that we grasp these issues before we discuss physics or ethics, and he prefers to keep them out of his physical
or ethical argument.
Similarly, then, we should not be surprised if he approaches ethics with some quite speciﬁc assumptions about the
nature of ﬁrst principles and the sorts of arguments they allow, but thinks it inappropriate to explain or justify his
assumptions in a ethical work.2 We have Aristotle's own authority for supposing that he will assume quite a lot, and that
we have to turn to his other works to evaluate his assumptions.
And yet, Aristotle's silences do not simply reﬂect his views about appropriateness in a particular work. It is a more
general feature of his works that the importance of a claim is often inversely proportional to the amount of space he
gives it. He is in no doubt about the importance of understanding the ﬁrst principles and getting them right. We should
investigate ﬁrst principles;
for they have great inﬂuence on what comes next. For it seems that the origin is more than half the whole, and that
many answers to the questions we investigate become clear through the origin. (EN 1098b6–8)
For similar reasons, the study of the soul ought to contribute to knowledge of nature, since the soul is a ﬁrst principle
(DA 402a4–7). But Aristotle does not characteristically examine them in the detail that their importance might seem to
warrant. His admission in the Ethics that his account is rough and sketchy (EN 1098a20–2) applies equally to some of
his other discussions of ﬁrst principles.3
The difﬁculty is not that Aristotle is never willing to go into detail. Characteristics of animals, senses of words, varieties
of political systems, all move him to full and precise description; but on the most important issues of all his remarks
are often brief, inexplicit, and inconclusive. Some of the best-informed modern students of Aristotle recognize the
frustration that many readers must feel in trying to ﬁx his view on some fundamental issues.4 Perhaps his sketchiness
about ﬁrst principles reﬂects his awareness of the obscurity and difﬁculty of the questions they raise, and some
tentativeness in his answers.
But whatever the reason for Aristotle's silences, we should not take them to count against an attempt to attribute to
him the sorts of views I have described in the previous chapters. A philosophical reader may in any case want to know
how Aristotle might deal with the questions I have raised. I have tried to answer that question. But I also claim to
describe views that Aristotle explicitly or implicitly holds, not simply views that he might have formed if he had faced
certain questions. His silences, at any rate, do not show that he does not hold these views; they should not surprise us,
if we are familiar with the general character of Aristotle's works.

472

CHAPTER 22 § 255

255. The Treatment of Aristotle's Early Works
I have described some contrasts between the Metaphysics and the Organon and Physics; and I suggest that the contrast
reﬂects a development in Aristotle's views, both on methodological questions about dialectic and science, and on more
speciﬁc questions about substance, form, and matter. I take the contrast to be a good reason for supposing that the
Metaphysics is a later work than the other works (which I will continue to call ‘early’, simply for convenience).
Arguments about Aristotelian chronology are, admittedly, hazardous. We have no ﬁrm non-philosophical grounds for
ordering the treatises in the Corpus; and philosophical arguments are liable to be inconclusive on this issue. In this
particular case my argument may appear especially inconclusive, in so far as it rests partly on silences in the early works.
They do not describe ﬁrst philosophy, as the Metaphysics conceives it. But they do not deny its existence; the Organon
explicitly rejects only a demonstrative science, without considering a non-demonstrative alternative. Nor do the early
works offer the elaborate account of substance that is worked out in Metaphysics vii–ix. But their failure to say certain
things may simply reﬂect the fact that they are more elementary treatises; or Aristotle may be following his rule of not
mentioning more than he takes to be necessary for the questions currently at issue.
I do not think this is a good enough explanation of the difference between the early works and the Metaphysics. The
difference is especially clear in Aristotle's early views on the relation between subject, this, essence, and form (in his
discussion of substance), and in his claims about knowledge and demonstration (in his remarks on science and
dialectic). In both cases, the argument of the early works is far less intelligible if we take them to rely on views similar to
those in the Metaphysics. On the contrary; they raise just the puzzles that are set out in Metaphysics iii. It is reasonable to
infer that Aristotle sees the puzzles arising from his early views, and that he changes his mind.
Still, I do not want to make my account of Aristotle depend entirely on the claim that his views actually develop in the
direction I have described. Let us, then, assume for the sake of argument that he had already formed the outlook of the
Metaphysics when he wrote the early works. How ought we, on this assumption, to understand the relation between the
different works?
I believe that in this case we must say that Aristotle fails to understand some of his views. If he takes his early works to
offer an elementary, intuitive, or selective statement of the very same doctrine that he expounds in the Metaphysics, he is
wrong. Commonsense distinctions by themselves do not support, or do not uniquely support, Aristotle's

CHAPTER 22 § 256

473

views about substance. Moreover, a natural development of the views in the early works leads to conclusions
(e.g. about the claims of matter and form to be substance) that conﬂict with the views in the Metaphysics. Similarly, we
must say that Aristotle's foundationalism in the Analytics results from a one-sided view of science and objectivity, and
that this view needs considerable modiﬁcation in the light of Aristotle's views on ﬁrst philosophy. Any attempt to treat
these different parts of the Corpus as different expositions of the same body of doctrine conceals major
differences—whether or not Aristotle himself sees the differences. Even if we refuse to explain the differences
chronologically, we ought to recognize them.
Still, I do not want my argument to depend wholly on claims about doctrinal differences between different works.
Even if we believe that the Metaphysics is simply a fuller exposition of the doctrine of the earlier works, it is useful to see
what it adds to them. For I have claimed that the early works do not by themselves explain how dialectical argument
leads to objective principles, though they assume that they have found objective principles and suggest no method of
discovery besides dialectic (in cases where empirical inquiry is not appropriate). On this issue the early works raise a
legitimate question that they do not answer; but the Metaphysics answers the question.
If I am right, then we must appeal to the arguments of the Metaphysics if we are to explain why the early works ﬁnd
objective principles. To show that the principles found in the early works are objective principles, we must defend them
by a form of argument that the early works themselves do not provide.
Whether I am right or wrong about these questions does not depend on claims about the order or consistency of the
Corpus. The issue can be settled only by an examination of the argument in the Metaphysics in comparison with the early
works. This is why I have not conﬁned myself to the methodological parts of the Metaphysics (in Book iv), but have also
examined some of the discussion of substance. Only the details of the argument show the difference, if any, that results
from Aristotle's effort to offer arguments that are proper to ﬁrst philosophy. I have argued that Aristotle's treatment of
subject, essence, potentiality, actuality, matter, and form, relies on premisses drawn from ﬁrst philosophy; even if the
doctrine of the early works were just the same, only the arguments of the Metaphysics justify it.

256. The Treatment of Aristotle's Late Works
Part III may reasonably raise doubts, partly similar and partly opposite to those raised by Part I. In Part I I have been
quite strict about taking

474

CHAPTER 22 § 256

the early works on their own terms, resisting any attempt to interpret them in the light of the Metaphysics. I have
refused, for instance, to appeal to Metaphysics iv to explain what Aristotle has in mind (in Topics i 2) in ascribing a
constructive role to dialectic. Similarly, I have been cautious about the references in the Physics to ﬁrst philosophy, and
to a discipline common to the sciences; I have refused to interpret these remarks in the light of Metaphysics iv. But in
discussing the De Anima, Ethics, and Politics (which I will call, for convenience, the ‘late’ works), I have freely appealed
to the methods and doctrines of ﬁrst philosophy, despite Aristotle's silences.
This policy might be defensible if we knew for sure that the late works are indeed later than the Metaphysics and that the
early works are earlier than it. But since we do not know this for sure, my interpretative assumptions may reasonably
seem contrived, and liable to convey a misleading impression of actual difference between the early and late works; the
apparent difference may simply be the result of different policies about interpreting one work in the light of another.
Such doubts might arise especially about my treatment of the De Anima, in comparison to the Physics. Both belong to
natural philosophy, and both refer brieﬂy, in quite similar terms, to ﬁrst philosophy.5 If I had discussed them together,
instead of interpolating a discussion of the Metaphysics, the two works would appear quite similar on some of the
relevant issues. If it is reasonable to pass directly from the Physics to the De Anima, it seems no less reasonable to go on
to the other late works. It is not obvious that ﬁrst philosophy, as opposed to natural philosophy, provides the necessary
foundation for understanding Aristotle's moral and political theory.
In reply to these doubts, I would in fact be ready to defend the actual lateness of the late works; I think it is historically,
as well as philosophically, reasonable to interpret them in the light of the Metaphysics.6 But I would defend this
chronological claim with much less assurance than I would defend the early date of the early works. A proper defence
involves discussion of the relation between the De Anima and the other psychological and biological works; of the
order of the three ethical treatises in the Corpus; and of the composition of the Politics and its relation to the ethical
treatises. I believe a full discussion of these issues would conﬁrm my suggestion about the lateness of the late works;
but I have not tried to conﬁrm the suggestion with a full discussion.
In this case, as with the early works, I hope the philosophical point of my argument is worth discussing even if one sets
aside the chronological issue. In particular, I have tried to bring out the ways in which the De Anima displays the
method advocated in the Metaphysics. It deals with

CHAPTER 22 § 256

475

the initial puzzles by sorting out preliminary questions, and ‘makes a new start’ from a principle that has more than
purely dialectical support. I do not see any parallel in Physics i–ii. The De Anima also begins from the views about form,
matter, this, potentiality, and actuality that are developed in the Metaphysics; no such pattern is to be found in the Physics.7
If we assume that the Physics and the De Anima were written at the same time, we ought to conclude none the less that
only the De Anima practises the methods of ﬁrst philosophy. Whether or not Aristotle realizes it, one line of
argument—the one in the De Anima—belongs to strong dialectic, and the other—the one in the Physics—belongs to
pure dialectic. Since strong dialectic uses dialectical arguments, but uses them selectively, it is not surprising that a
purely dialectical argument provides, among other things, some of the material of strong dialectic. Hence we should
not be surprised to ﬁnd such material in the Physics.
Let us now assume (contrary to fact) that the De Anima gives no evidence of any intention to practise strong dialectic.
In that case, my account of it suggests how the argument must be understood, and what we must believe about the
premisses, if it is to conform to the standards for strong dialectic. I believe it is worth discussing whether in fact we can
reasonably, in the light of the Metaphysics, claim that the argument of the De Anima conforms to strong dialectic, and
whether in particular the premisses can be supported by something more than common beliefs. Readers might agree
or disagree with me on this issue, irrespective of what they may believe about the order of the works, or about
Aristotle's actual intention in writing them.
Something similar is true for the Ethics and Politics. Aristotle does not say that his crucial premisses derive support from
strong dialectic and from ﬁrst philosophy. But I argue that in fact this support is available for the premisses, and that
the prospect of this support makes it more reasonable to claim that he has found objective moral principles. I might
still be right about this even if I am quite wrong about Aristotle's actual intentions.
For the late works as well as the early, there is room for doubt about my historical claims and assumptions, and I have
argued that the correctness of such doubts would still not undermine some claims that might deserve discussion in
their own right. In saying all this I do not intend to take back the historical claims; and I do not imply that they are not
an important part of a plausible account of a philosopher's views. Moreover, I doubt if a reader could reasonably agree
with my philosophical claims without thinking they made some prima facie case for the historical claims too. But such
a prima facie case might be overridden by conﬂicting historical evidence; and I have tried to identify

476

CHAPTER 22 § 257

the philosophical claims that do not depend on the historical case that might be overridden. The philosophical claims
suggest than an appeal to ﬁrst philosophy makes quite some difference to the status and the cogency of the arguments
in the late works.

257. Strong Dialectic
The structure of this book and of its cumulative argument relies considerably on the claims about strong dialectic, in
Part II; and some questions may be raised about whether strong dialectic will bear all the weight. The main questions
are these: (1) Does Aristotle's account of the science of being or ﬁrst philosophy show that he has anything like strong
dialectic in mind? (2) Can we give a clear account of the difference between strong dialectic and ‘pure’ or ‘ordinary’
dialectic? (3) Does strong dialectic support Aristotle's claim to ﬁnd objective, and not merely endoxic, principles? (4)
Does Aristotle practise strong dialectic in Metaphysics iv? (5) Does he practise it in Metaphysics vii–ix? (6) Do its methods
apply to psychology and ethics, and not just to the area of universal science?
The basic question is the second; if we answer it, we go some distance towards answering all the others. I describe
strong dialectic in general terms, simply as a method that differs from pure dialectic in so far as it selects only some of
the premisses that pure dialectic allows.8 Strong dialectic requires us to stick to premisses that we have some good
reason for accepting, beyond the fact that they are matters of common belief.
This very general account of strong dialectic does not require very much. Since the strong dialectical premisses are a
subset of dialectical premisses, they must be matters of common belief (or suitably related to them). This condition
excludes simply treating all results of empirical inquiry, as such, as appropriate premisses of strong dialectic, since there
is no reason to suppose that these results will automatically be matters of common belief. But if we simply require some
good reason beyond common belief, many sorts of propositions count as possible premisses for strong dialectic; and
evidently they will result in arguments of quite different degrees of strength.
I introduce strong dialectic to explain the type of argument that Aristotle attributes to ﬁrst philosophy. I might be right
about this even if he thinks there is no scope for strong dialectic in any other area, or he thinks that the premisses of
different arguments in different areas of inquiry have no signiﬁcant connexion with each other. I suggest, however,
that Aristotle thinks strong dialectic has a wider scope, and that the arguments of ﬁrst philosophy provide a foundation
for strong

CHAPTER 22 § 258

477

dialectic in other areas. The defence of strong dialectic as a possible method for universal science is equally a defence
of it in narrower areas; and in fact the conclusions of ﬁrst philosophy serve as appropriate premisses for strong
dialectic about the soul and about ethical and political questions.
My account of strong dialectic makes it reasonable to expect that different arguments will have premisses of different
types. This difference becomes clear in the progress of ﬁrst philosophy through the Metaphysics. In Book iv the
premisses express basic conditions presupposed by the very possibility of scientiﬁc study of an objective reality; and
Aristotle argues that those who reject study of an objective reality give up the possibility of rational inquiry altogether.
He argues, moreover, that they are wrong to think they must reject claims to know an objective reality; they reject such
claims only because they accept epistemological assumptions that we have no reason to accept. To this extent, the
argument is transcendental, appealing to the necessary conditions for being justiﬁed in believing in something that we
cannot rationally abandon. Though Aristotle himself does not explicitly distinguish a priori from empirical knowledge,
these arguments in Metaphysics iv have a strong claim to embody a priori knowledge.
In so far as strong dialectic also supports the theory of substance in Metaphysics vii–ix, its arguments must be less purely
a priori than those in Book iv. Once we accept the connexions Aristotle sees between substance, subject, form,
essence, cause, and potentiality, we introduce (on a priori grounds) some explanatory assumptions that are empirically
falsiﬁable. I have argued that Aristotle must rely on such assumptions—especially about ﬁnal causation—to defend his
version of the claim that form is substance. Since I have emphasized the wide scope of the initial description of strong
dialectic, there is no cause for suspicion in the fact that Metaphysics iv and vii–ix rely on different types of premisses,
even though both arguments count as strong dialectic and as ﬁrst philosophy.

258. The Uses of Strong Dialectic
If we go this far with Aristotle, then it is reasonable to regard his account of the soul and of psychological states as part
of a continuous argument in strong dialectic. For if his account of the puzzles about the soul is correct, then the
explanatory arguments that support the identiﬁcation of form with substance also support the identiﬁcation of soul
with substance as form.
Further questions arise, however, in the discussion of ethics. If the premisses of ethical theory belong to strong
dialectic, it does not follow

478

CHAPTER 22 § 258

that they also depend on ﬁrst philosophy, since, as I have emphasized, nothing like this follows from the initial
description of strong dialectic. But Aristotle himself shows why the premisses depend on ﬁrst philosophy. For he
makes it clear that he derives ethical principles from premisses about the human essence and the human soul; and we
already know that these premisses depend on his theory of substance, and ultimately on ﬁrst philosophy.
If we (wrongly, in my view) reject this conclusion, we might object that the psychological claims in the Ethics are mere
matters of common belief, so that the argument is after all purely dialectical. It is hard to refute this objection
conclusively, since Aristotle says so little about the status of his premisses. Moreover, the psychological claims ought
not to be obscure or technical, if they are to belong to a dialectical argument. But they are not mere matters of common
belief. Aristotle's speciﬁc claims about the essence and function of a human being are highly disputable, if they are
interpreted against the background of common sense. They are reasonable, and some apparent objections to them are
removed, if they are interpreted by reference to the De Anima rather than to common sense.9 For this reason, it is most
reasonable to assign the argument to strong dialectic; and if we agree with this, we connect the Ethics and Politics with
the argument that extends through the Metaphysics and De Anima.
But even if we admit this connexion, we might suspect that it is not very important. Even if the Ethics includes some
strong dialectic, this might not play a large role in supporting Aristotle's more speciﬁc moral and political conclusions.
This suspicion can be removed only by going into some detail; and this is why I have tried to show that the main
argument relies indispensably on the premisses about the human essence and the human good. If this is true, then the
argument of these treatises as a whole belongs to strong dialectic rather than pure dialectic.
Even if I am wrong to claim that Aristotle introduces anything like strong dialectic, I am not necessarily wrong about
the role of ﬁrst philosophy in ethics; and this role implies an important connexion between ethics and metaphysics,
even if it does not rest on strong dialectic. The connexion is clear if we reject strong dialectic, but believe that ﬁrst
philosophy is a demonstrative science with principles grasped by intuition. In that case, the connexions between ethics
and metaphysics take ethics beyond pure dialectic by connecting to a demonstrative system.
If, on the other hand, we think the argument of the Metaphysics is pure dialectic, then the connexion between the Ethics
and the Metaphysics does not lead us beyond pure dialectic. Whereas the demonstrative view of ﬁrst philosophy and
ethics gives a foundationalist argument to show

CHAPTER 22 § 258

479

that ethics reaches objective principles, the purely dialectical view leaves ethics with the general puzzle about pure
dialectic and objective principles. But even if all the argument is purely dialectical, it is worth seeing whether the
Metaphysics and the late works are connected in the way I suggest.
Coherence plays a useful role even in a purely dialectical argument. If some of our metaphysical views undermine our
ethical premisses, we face a possible source of doubts and puzzles, unless we try to divorce ethics from metaphysics
more sharply than Aristotle is willing to do. His appeal to the human essence and function shows that he thinks
metaphysics and psychology play a legitimate role in ethical dialectic; and so it is useful to see whether his views in
these different areas support each other. I have argued that they do support each other; and this part of my argument
is independent of the claims about strong dialectic.
If, however, I am quite wrong about strong dialectic, then I have to say that Aristotle has no answer to the puzzles
about dialectic and objective ﬁrst principles, and in general no argument to remove the apparent gap between his
arguments and the alleged status of his conclusions. I assume that the appeal to intuition, restricting dialectic to a
purely heuristic role, is not a good answer to the puzzles.10 If Aristotle offers nothing more than pure dialectic, he has
no answer at all. Since the puzzles seem to be reasonable and serious, it is a serious objection to Aristotle's
philosophical method if he has no answer to them.
A simple appeal to strong dialectic does not do much by itself to answer the puzzles about how dialectic can lead to
objective principles. The credibility of an answer depends on how good a reason beyond common beliefs we can give
for accepting the premisses of a particular argument of strong dialectic. In this case also, we have no option but to
examine the arguments that Aristotle does and can offer on each issue.
A different line of objection to my argument might suggest that I have described strong dialectic correctly, but wrongly
supposed that Aristotle in his philosophical works practises what I have called pure dialectic. It might be argued that
the restrictions I suggest for suitable premisses of strong dialectic are simply those that Aristotle intends for all
dialectical argument, and that pure dialectic has no place in his actual dialectical arguments.
It is hard to refute this objection conclusively, since Aristotle is quite non-committal at some of the crucial points in his
account of dialectic. He insists that common beliefs should be discussed only selectively, and that we should approach
the puzzles by making a new start from an unchallenged premiss. One might suggest that the restrictions implied in
strong dialectic are actually implicit in dialectic all along.

480

CHAPTER 22 § 259

I ﬁnd this suggestion less likely than my own, because it fails to explain the contrast Aristotle sees between dialectic
and the method of ﬁrst philosophy. In his view, dialectic argues ‘from the common beliefs alone’ (Met. 995b24). If ﬁrst
philosophy is dialectical to the extent I have described, and yet does not argue from the common beliefs alone, then
Aristotle should not suppose that the premisses of ordinary dialectic are chosen by the criteria of strong dialectic. In
that case, we should not take the restrictions of strong dialectic to be implicit in the account of dialectic.
Even if I am wrong about this, however, I still think it is worth considering the place of strong dialectic in Aristotle.
Even if it states implicit conditions for all dialectical argument, rather than identifying a special type of dialectical
argument, it is worth seeing what the implicit conditions are. If they are the conditions that I ascribe to strong dialectic,
then Aristotle's dialectical arguments are not open to some of the objections that would damage them if they belonged
to pure dialectic (as I describe it). If my account of strong dialectic gives an accurate picture of the argument in
Aristotle's later works, then that argument acquires some interest that a purely dialectical argument would lack.

259. Systematic Philosophy in Aristotle
The effect of my argument is to support one form of a ‘systematic’ view of Aristotle.11 I do not suppose that the whole
Corpus expresses a uniﬁed philosophical system; and in particular I have argued that Aristotle changes his mind on
some fundamental issues about the nature of his argument. None the less, I eventually suggest that his later works
develop views that are connected enough to count as systematic.
The mere recognition of a system in Aristotle should not necessarily lead us to think better of him. Philosophers' views
on particular issues are sometimes more plausible than the systems in which they try to embed them; sometimes the
views evidently do not ﬁt into the system, and sometimes the system distorts the views until they ﬁt. Readers must
decide whether this is true of Aristotle, as I understand him, by considering the particular systematic argument I claim
to ﬁnd in him.
I believe, however, that in this case the recognition of a system makes Aristotle look better. By developing it, he
exposes the more fundamental issues underlying some of his dialectical puzzles. The argument of the Metaphysics
exposes more clearly the questions that are really at

CHAPTER 22 § 259

481

stake in the dialectical arguments about substance. The early works do not clearly identify the questions that need to be
answered if we are to ﬁnd the genuine basic subjects; but Metaphysics vii both raises and answers these questions,
because it begins from the discussion of substance and essence conducted in Book iv.
If Aristotle's psychology did not rest on ﬁrst philosophy, his account of soul and body would not reveal the parallel
between problems about the soul and the general problems about form and matter, and it would not show how souls
and minds meet reasonable general conditions for being substances. The systematic character of his argument suggests
the proper solution to puzzles raised by dualism and materialism, and explains why each of these views seems both
attractive and unsatisfactory. It is not obvious that the solution Aristotle offers is as satisfactory as he thinks; but it puts
forward some options worth investigating. The options would be far less plausible if they were not embedded in the
more general theory derived from ﬁrst philosophy.12
In moral and political theory the issues are more complicated. On the one hand, we may doubt whether Aristotle's
system has any important inﬂuence on his moral and political views at all. On the other hand, we may think its
inﬂuence is important and pernicious. I have tried to answer the ﬁrst objection by describing the pervasive inﬂuence of
Aristotle's conception of a rational agent in his moral theory. I have tried to answer the second objection by arguing
that the inﬂuence of Aristotle's metaphysical premisses is not pernicious, because they cannot fairly be held responsible
for the errors in his particular political conclusions.
We may have more general philosophical reasons for rejecting attempts to found moral arguments on metaphysical
premisses. We may think not that Aristotle carries out his argument badly, but that such a line of argument is
misguided in itself. I have not tried to argue directly against this sort of philosophical position; but my argument bears
indirectly on it. We are likely to think there is something wrong with Aristotle's type of argument if we ﬁnd something
obviously and badly wrong in every example of this type of argument that we examine. It is therefore useful to show
that nothing is obviously or badly wrong with particular examples of such argument. I do not claim to have shown this
for Aristotle; I have not examined all reasonable objections to his premisses, or to the further moral and political
consequences of his conclusions, in comparison with the conclusions of other theories. But I hope to have shown that
his theory is plausible enough to make it worth our while to raise these further questions.

482

CHAPTER 22 § 260

260. Metaphysics, Epistemology, and Method
In the ﬁrst chapter I suggested that Aristotle's views reveal an apparent conﬂict between his metaphysical realist view
of ﬁrst principles and his dialectical method of inquiry; such inquiry did not seem to give us good reason for claiming
to have reached the objective principles that are needed to meet metaphysical realist conditions. A natural response to
this puzzle is acceptance of epistemological foundationalism; and I argue that in the Analytics Aristotle accepts
foundationalism about science. The belief that realism requires foundationalism helps to explain his contrast between
science and dialectic.
Aristotle never explicitly gives up the foundationalism of the Analytics; and he never explicitly sets out the
epistemological position that would make it reasonable to accept the claims of ﬁrst philosophy. On these issues he
shows his inferiority to Plato as an epistemologist; indeed we have to appeal to Plato's account of dialectic to make
sense of Aristotle's own metaphysical arguments and of his conception of philosophical method. His inexplicitness
about his ﬁrst principles conceals some of his commitments from him; and, correspondingly, a clearer view of his ﬁrst
principles makes his commitments clearer.
Strong dialectic removes the gap between Aristotle's dialectical methods and his claim to reach objective principles—if
we are willing to make the appropriate epistemological assumptions. I add this condition to stress the point that a
defence of strong dialectic does not answer the doubts of metaphysical realists who are also foundationalists. Since
Aristotle is this sort of metaphysical realist himself in the Analytics, it would do him no good, in the light of such
assumptions, to think of strong dialectic. For strong dialectic assumes that in some conditions the appropriate kind of
coherence between our beliefs constitutes justiﬁcation for believing them to be true; and in the Analytics Aristotle
rejects that assumption. In order to take strong dialectic seriously, he has to reject foundationalism. I do not claim that
Aristotle ever thoroughly rejects foundationalism. But I claim that the anti-sceptical arguments in Metaphysics iv show
that at any rate he does not consistently adhere to the foundationalism of the Analytics.
Equally, readers who are quite convinced of foundationalism will not be convinced by the defence of strong dialectic as
a method for discovery and defence of objective principles. I have not tried to discuss all the more resourceful varieties
of foundationalism, or to remove all the doubts about coherence; but discussion of the Analytics should have made
clear some of the difﬁculties that foundationalism faces.
Similar epistemological questions arise about the structure of Aristotle's arguments in psychology and ethics. I have
argued that these

CHAPTER 22 § 261

483

belong to a fairly systematic argument appealing to ﬁrst philosophy; and I have suggested that the systematic character
of the argument supports both the psychology and ethics and the metaphysical premisses. If that is so, and justiﬁcation
does not go only one way, then some appeals to coherence must confer justiﬁcation. But Aristotle does not explain
why that should be so; and his explicit epistemological doctrine in the Analytics would lead us to expect something quite
different. Aristotle's views on metaphysics, psychology, and ethics constitute a rather impressive whole; but we need to
add something to Aristotle if we are to explain why we should be so impressed by their systematic character. Aristotle
is less than fully self-conscious about his own achievements.

261. Defences of Aristotle
I have suggested both that Aristotle can defend his method in principle, and that he can defend some of the particular
conclusions he actually reaches by it. These two sorts of defences are distinct. We might be satisﬁed that Aristotle has a
good account of how strong dialectic can give us reason to believe we have found objective principles, and still decide
that Aristotle himself has executed this project badly. We might decide that he is wrong in his selection of principles
that he thinks defensible by strong dialectic, or in his inferences from them, or in both ways. Still, a defence of Aristotle
on the ﬁrst point will be more convincing if we can also defend him to some extent on the second; it is easier to make a
method seem capable of reaching reasonable conclusions if we can point to some reasonable conclusions that it
reaches.
If we set out to defend Aristotle's particular version of strong dialectic, and the conclusions he reaches, it is especially
important to face the objection that sometimes his theory leads him to clearly false conclusions. This is why the
discussion of the Politics is relevant to the main issues examined in this book. We might readily suppose that any sort of
dialectical argument relying, even selectively, on common beliefs, is bound to be parochial, mistaking the common
beliefs of a particular time and society for objective principles. There is no doubt that Aristotle sometimes speaks as
though his philosophical principles justify conclusions that strike us as clearly false, and especially some conclusions
that seem to reﬂect his historical limitations and political biases.
To show that his ﬁrst principles and his methods are not open to this objection, I have argued that they actually
provide a basis for criticism of his more questionable conclusions. If this is so, then, to that extent, Aristotle's
principles cannot be charged with being parochial or

484

CHAPTER 22 § 261

inevitably biased, and to that extent his practice of strong dialectic turns out to be defensible.
I believe Aristotle's position on these issues has the philosophical interest that belongs to an unsolved problem. Our
starting-point is not basically very different from his. For though we beneﬁt from a far longer tradition of reﬂexion
about philosophical argument, we have not found a clearly acceptable alternative to dialectic. The Aristotelian view of
philosophical argument is not unfamiliar to us; and we can hardly avoid his difﬁculties about the status of ﬁrst
principles. We should be interested, therefore, to see how far he can answer these difﬁculties, and what sorts of
conclusions he can justify by the right sorts of dialectical arguments.
It would clearly be foolish to try to reach a deﬁnite conclusion about the plausibility of Aristotle's actual views simply
by considering what he says. In many cases the sort of view he presents has been frequently discussed; and discussion
has led to clearer articulation of the view, and to sharper appreciation of its difﬁculties. Moreover, further discussion
has not always resulted in agreement about how Aristotle's views ought to be elaborated, or about which tend in the
right or wrong direction.
It would, indeed, be boring if Aristotle merely said things that strike us as evidently true or false (though some things
he says fall into one of those categories). One of his most distinguished modern students writes:
What is true in Aristotle has become part, and no small part, of the heritage of all educated men; what is false has
been gradually rejected, so that explicit criticism is now hardly necessary.13
Though this remark is probably meant as a compliment to Aristotle, it does not really do him justice. It was not true in
1923 when it was written, and it is not true now; probably we should not want it to be true. A sympathetic and critical
student might reasonably ﬁnd Aristotle's views a stimulus to fruitful controversy, needing further explanation and
evaluation, but deserving the effort.
We gain at least one beneﬁt from examining Aristotle's own statement of his views on topics that other philosophers
have discussed at greater length and often with greater sophistication. His different works show how his doctrines
form a systematic view; and if we examine the system, we can see how the particular doctrines gain plausibility from
their place in the system. To this extent it is wise to accept Plato's advice that the dialectician should take a synoptic
view. Aristotle did not accept this advice immediately; but he eventually accepted it, to the great beneﬁt of his own
philosophical thinking and of those who study it.

CHAPTER 22 § 262

485

262. Dialectic and Historical Study
In examining Aristotle's views on dialectic, I have relied on certain assumptions about the interpretation and
understanding of Aristotle, and about reasonable ways to study the history of philosophy in general. Study of his views
on dialectic is interesting and useful partly because it helps us to understand Aristotle's views on these questions, and
helps us to decide whether his views constitute a plausible approach to the study of past philosophers. His views on
dialectic, and on the use of past philosophers in dialectical discussion, suggest how we ought to assess an examination
of his own views.
Aristotle thinks he understands his predecessors better than they understood themselves, because he sees what they
were trying to say, and articulates it better than they articulate it themselves.14 This approach to them is meant to make
them fruitful contributors to dialectical argument. It is not an uncontroversial approach; it involves dangers of
anachronism and of subtler forms of distortion. But it is the best approach we have available.
For Aristotle the history of philosophy is a part of philosophical discussion; it is not a museum of freaks or of primitive
mentalities; above all it is an encouragement to further inquiry, not a source of sceptical doubt. If we can treat Aristotle
as he treats his predecessors, and ﬁnd that he does as well for us as a contributor to philosophical discussion as they do
for him, we have treated him fairly; and in doing so we have given a further argument in support of his own view of
the value of dialectic.
One of the pioneers of philosophical study of the history of philosophy by English-speaking philosophers expresses a
broadly Aristotelian view in these terms:
We have been learning of late to know much more about philosophers, but it is possible for knowledge about
philosophers to ﬂourish inversely as the knowledge of philosophy. The revived interest which is noticeable in the
history of philosophy may be an indication either of philosophical vigour or of philosophical decay. In those whom
intellectual indolence, or a misunderstood and disavowed metaphysic, has landed in scepticism there often survives
a curiosity about the literary history of philosophy, and the writings which this curiosity produces tend further to
spread the notion that philosophy is a matter about which there has been much guessing by great intellects, but no
deﬁnite truth is to be attained. It is otherwise with those who see in philosophy a progressive effort towards a fullyarticulated conception of the world as rational. To them its past history is of interest as representing steps in this
progress which have already been taken for us, and which, if we will make them our own, carry us so far on our way
towards the freedom of perfect understanding; while to ignore them is not to return to the simplicity of a prephilosophic age, but to condemn ourselves to grope in the maze of ‘cultivated opinion’, itself the confused result of
those past systems of thought which we will not trouble ourselves to think out.15

486

CHAPTER 22 § 262

Green applies these general views to the study of Hume; but they apply as well to the study of Aristotle, and they are
Aristotle's views on historical study.
We should not accept either Green's or Aristotle's view uncritically, any more than they accept their predecessors' views
uncritically. In particular we may not ﬁnd Green's Hegelian additions an unqualiﬁed improvement over Aristotle. Nor
should we be too ready to share Green's complacent assurance that we have reached the position from which we can
deﬁnitely assess what aspects of past philosophy count as progress. Still, Green rightly regards one form of historical
study as a reasonable part of philosophical inquiry; far from being a source of scepticism, it should be part of the
philosopher's answer to sceptical doubts about the progress of philosophy. Descartes, as we saw, explicitly draws the
sceptical conclusion from historical study.16 Aristotle challenges us to study and understand the history of philosophy
so that it becomes part of constructive philosophical dialectic.

Notes
Chapter 1
1. See also EN 1098b3–8, Top. 105a16, 141b4, APr 68b35, Phys. 188b32, 189a5, 193a5, EE 1220a15. Gnôrima haplôs:
see EN 1095b2–3, Phys. 184a18, APo 72a3, Top. 141b25; cf. holôs gnôsta, Met. 1029b11. Gnôrima phusei: Phys. 184a17,
APo 72a1, Met. 1029b8; cf. 993b11, ta tê(i) phusei phanerôtata, DA 413a11–12. See Zeller [1897] i 284–9, Grote
[1872], i 196, 239, 332.
2. See DA 402a3–10, Met. 982a1–3, 1029b3–13, EN 1095a30–b4, EE 1216b26–39.
3. See Burnyeat [1981].
4. Different examples that Aristotle takes to be parallel to ‘known by nature’ are discussed by Evans [1977], 53–61,
68–73. Some examples and issues are discussed by Evans [1974] and Moore [1975].
5. Grote [1872], 269–71, discusses the contrast between ‘known to us’ and ‘known by nature’, against Hamilton's
account of Aristotle's appeal to ‘common sense’. Grote is clearly right in emphasizing the caution implied in calling
something ‘known to us’ (i.e. the suggestion that it is not necessarily an unchallengeable ﬁrst principle). But his
reply to Hamilton is exaggerated when Grote takes an unduly narrow view of the scope of dialectic and its
procedure of arguing from common beliefs; see 274f on Top. 100a30, discussed at 2n40.
6. Aristotle's term archê often refers to primary and fundamental things, and often to propositions; the second use is
secondary to the ﬁrst, since a propositional principle counts as a principle in so far as it describes a real principle.
Wieland gives insufﬁcient grounds for reversing this order, and for his claim that Aristotle replaces a search for
things with a search for the right explanatory concepts and (propositional) principles: ‘Aristotle puts the problem of
ﬁrst principles on a new level, when he no longer treats principles as independent entities or forces, but as concepts
of reﬂection which do not release one from the duty of detailed inquiry in the individual case.’ [1960], 136. Wieland
offers false alternatives here, to the extent that ‘which do not . . . ’ does not justify his ﬁrst claim.
7. On the character of gnôrima phusei see Aubenque [1966], 62–5, Wieland [1970], 69–85. Wieland denies that talk of
gnôrima phusei indicates belief in an ‘objektive Seinsordnung’. He claims that the distinction between ‘to us’ and ‘by
nature’ only makes clear ‘was wir immer schon vorausgesetzt haben, wenn wir etwas aus etwas anderes begründen’
(73). The point seems to be that something becomes known by nature by serving as a principle. But this explanation
overlooks the role of natural priority in explaining why it is correct for some things rather than others to serve as
principles. Wieland claims: ‘Aristoteles kennt keine besondere Bewusstseinssphäre, der dann auf rätselhafte Weise
eine von ihr unabhängige subjektfreie

488

8.
9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.

NOTES

Dingswelt gegenüberstehen würde’, 73. But I think such a contrast (not necessarily enigmatic, and presumably not
involving a completely ‘subject-free’ world of things, if subjects are themselves part of the objective world) is just
the contrast that is needed to explain Aristotle's views on the priority of the pragma to the logos.
Some aspects of Aristotle's views on truth are discussed by Wilpert [1940], though without much reference to the
claims about asymmetry in the Catg. passage.
See § 103 on perception.
Putnam [1983] provides a lively summary of some of the issues in recent debates about realism. He states an
especially clear challenge to Aristotelian metaphysical realism, in so far as this rests on claims about explanation,
215f. His claims about the nature of explanation, however, are open to some doubt; for a few further remarks see §
52.
See Hume, Treatise i.3.14, p. 167; “Tis a common observation, that the mind has a great propensity to spread itself
on external objects, and to conjoin any internal impressions, which they occasion.' Hume recognizes a natural
protest: ‘As if causes did not operate entirely independent of the mind, and would not continue their operation
even though there was no mind existent to contemplate them or reason concerning them. This is to reverse the
order of nature, and make that secondary, which is really primary.’
Here I use ‘intuitive’ for beliefs that we hold without giving any inferential justiﬁcation. In discussing ﬁrst principles
that are known by nature I use ‘intuition’ to refer to beliefs that do not need, and in some cases do not allow, an
inferential justiﬁcation. This double use is familiar, e.g., at different places in Sidgwick [1907], and I hope it will
cause no confusion.
On Platonic and Aristotelian dialectic see Ryle [1965] (though he unjustiﬁably assimilates the Socratic elenchos to
eristic contests). Vlastos [1983] gives a far more satisfactory account of the elenchos; but I do not agree with the
contrast that he draws, 41–3, between the role of common beliefs in Socratic and Aristotelian dialectic (the contrast
results from underestimating their role in Socrates and overestimating it in Aristotle).
For quotation and discussion see § 18.
On the transition from dialectical debate to dialectical argument carried on by a single author see Greenwood
[1909], 128–32, Owen [1968], 222f. Though Top. 155b10–11 suggests that question-and-answer is the normal
method for dialectic, it is possible for the same person to take both parts; and Aristotle's works characteristically
follow this procedure. Top. 163a36–b16 shows how preparation for dialectical conversation develops into
philosophical exploration.
On foundationalism see § 71.
see § 78.
See e.g. the comments on Phys. i 1 discussed at 3n52.
This approach to Aristotle is best known from Jaeger [1948], and its application by Solmsen [1929], Nuyens
[1948], and Gauthier [1970]. It is sympathetically but soberly discussed by Ross [1957]. See 8nn4, 33, 13n33, 15n2.

NOTES

489

20. The best compact discussion of what is wrong with Jaeger's account of the early Aristotle is Owen [1965]. On
issues about Aristotle's development and about interpretative approaches see Wieland [1970], 19–41.
21. The best statement of this view is in Owen [1960], [1965].
22. See e.g. 3n12.
23. Arguments against premature appeals to development are offered, e.g., by Ross [1957] on the Pol. (see 16n13), by
Kahn [1966] on psychology, and by Owens [1963] and Reale [1980] on the Met.
24. see § 77.
25. See § § 94–5.
26. See 8n41 on ﬁrst philosophy and theology; 16n40 on theology and ethics.
27. See 16n6.

Chapter 2
1. see § 2.
2. This description of ‘naïve realism’ shows that I am not using the expression in the sense that is standard in
discussion of philosophical theories of perception.
3. Following Peck [1937] (apparently), and contrary to the OT, Le Blond [1945], and Balme [1972], 70, I take ton de,
639a10 〉 the demonstrative scientist, and eiê gar . . . as a parenthesis remarking that it is also possible to be
pepaideumenos in only one particular science (cf. EN 1094b22–1095a2).
4. ‘Peirastic’ dialectic will be appropriate for the educated person; see n36.
5. On proper principles see 7n15.
6. This similarity between the educated person and the dialectician is noticed (with appropriate reservations about
simply identifying the two) by Le Blond [1945]. For fuller discussion see Aubenque [1966], 282–9, and for some
doubts see Kullmann [1974], 95–7.
7. The biological, ethical, and political works are different, in so far as they are clearly meant to advance the branch of
inquiry that they discuss. But here too Aristotle is concerned with the issues that concern the educated person.
8. Historia is applied to empirical inquiry at, e.g., HA 491a13, APr 46a29, PA 646a9, PN 438a34–b1, GA 719a9–11,
740a23–4, 741a14–16, 750b31–3, 751a8–11, 763b15–16. DA 402a4 mentions historia about the soul; but Aristotle
does not imply (contrast Hicks [1907]) that the DA itself is a work of historia. The term is not applied to a survey of
dialectical endoxa or to a dialectical discussion. This is explained by the close connexion between historia and
empeiria, e.g. in GA 757b35–758a3 (remarked by Waitz [1844], ii. 459).
9. On appearances v. arguments see 3n61, DC 293a25–8, GC 325a23–8, PN 469a23–9, Met. 1056a12–14, EE
1216b26–8. Perception v. arguments: Phys. 262a19, DC 287b15–18, GC 323b30, 325a23–8, PN 468a20–3, Pol.
1257b13, 1323a40, 1328a20.
10. ‘Appear’ (a) sometimes implies truth (in constructions that should be translated ‘evidently is’; e.g. DC 297a2–6, GC
325b15, GA 729a31–2, 756b23–4, 759b28); (b) sometimes just means ‘appear to be so’, with no

490

11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

NOTES

implication that the appearance is true, e.g. GA 760b6. (But see Owen [1961], 240n4.)
Sometimes Aristotle speaks of appearances, what we see, what happens (ta gignomena, ta sumbainonta), or what is the
case (ta huparchonta) with no apparent distinction. This failure to mark the distinction is legitimate only if ‘appear’
has the veridical use. See APo 81b23, 88a2–5, Phys. 208a34, 210b33, DC 297b22, GC 316a10, 325a17–29, Metr.
346a6–8, PN 438b12, 439a27–9, 470b8–9, PA 642a18–21, GA 742a17–19, 750a21–3, 760b28–32, 765a26–9, Met.
986b27–33, 1075b37–1076a4, 1090b19–20, Pol. 1257b13, 1323a40, 1328a20, 1334a5, Rhet. 1396a28. In all these
places Aristotle shows no concern about any possible conﬂict between the appearances and the truth. An appeal to
the phainomena indicates modesty and tentativeness at DC 287b28–288a1 (to phainomenon contrasted with akribesterai
anankai), 291b24–5. Stocks's OT actually renders by ‘probable’. (ROT: ‘what seems to be the case’.) He appeals to
IA 809a24, which, however, gives examples of the apparent as opposed to the true, e.g. Top. 171b28, Rhet. 1402b23.
For non-sensory appearances see DC 270b5–15, 287b18, 303a20–4, 306a3–5. Indirect testimony: PN 462b12–22.
For fuller quotation and discussion see § 16.
False perceptual appearances: DC 290a8–24, GC 328a10–11, DA 428b24–5, PN 442b4–10, 446a7–20,
448b12–15, 460b20–7. While some theorists have gone wrong by neglecting appearances, DC 306a3–18, GC
314b2–16, 327a15–20, others have erred by naïve and uncritical conﬁdence in them: GC 315b9–15, 318b21–33,
320b2–4, 325a23–9, DA 404a27–31, 427b2–3, Met. 1009a6–1010a9.
He argues that Empedocles' claims conﬂict with appearances, GC 315a3–4; but the relevant appearances seem to
be simply the belief (dokei) that alteration is different from genesis, 315b15–16. Aristotle even regards his own
doctrine of the four causes as one of the appearances, PA 639a6–11, 640a10–18, and suggests that his
predecessors simply failed to ‘see’ the actual variety of causes, GA 778b2–11. Similarly, the teleological belief that
nature does nothing inadequate or pointless is taken to be an assumption derived from what we see, GA
788b20–3. Aristotle implies that it rests fairly directly on the perceptual appearances. These aspects of Aristotle's
view of appearances lead Düring [1961], [1943], 36f, to underestimate the empirical character of his method.
The sequence of gar-clauses in APr 46a17–25 indicates that empeiria is needed to grasp the phainomena, a20,
identiﬁed with the huparchonta, a23 (cf. Metr. 353b17–18), and that these are grasped by historia, a24.
Without experience theorists offer wildly inappropriate theories that would soon be rejected on closer acquaintance
with the subject: GC 315a33–b6, 316a5–14, Metr. 349a14–16, 352a17–20, PN 470b6–12, GA 742a16–18,
747a26–8, 748a13–17, 757b35–758a7. Aristotle thinks that once we have a full description of the appearances it
will be quite easy to ﬁnd the right theory to explain them: APr 46a17–27, HA 491a9–14. On the importance and
nature of experience see Le Blond [1939], 239f, 248–51, Mansion [1946], 217–24, Bourgey [1955], 37–55, 78–83.

NOTES

491

16. Non-perceptual appearances are often admitted; but this is because they are the next best thing to direct
observation when it is impossible, DC 270b4–20. See also 286a3–7, 290a13–18, 292a14–17, Metr. 350a15–18,
Moraux [1961], 182, 184.
17. On proper appearances and principles see APr 46a17, 53a2–3, APo 90a38–b1, GC 316a5–8, a13 (cf. 325a23). Metr.
346a27–31. Cf. 7n15.
18. On the sense of aporia see Aubenque [1961], 3–19, Owens [1963], 214–19.
19. Sources of puzzles: (1) The cause of some appearance. See PN 464b19–465a2, answered 466a17; GA 757a14–17,
answered a18; 776a9–10, answered a10; Metr. 338a26–339a4; the cause solves the puzzle, DC 292a10–22, b25–8;
(2) How a process happens. See GA 759a8–12; 733b24–6, answered 735a27–9; 736a24–7, 736b5–8, 740b3–5,
752a24–5, 770b27–35; (3) Something unexpected. See GA 757a14–17. Cf. 735a30–1; b4–5, answered 736a22–4;
754b20–1, 776a9–10, 745a19–27, Metr. 354b19–24, 355b21–33, 358a30–b11; 340a19–33, answered 340b4–6;
362a12–31, 355a33–b4, DC 291b24–292a18; (4) The nature of something. See GA 735a30–1, b4–5, 741a19–20,
Metr. 357b26–32; (5) Something undiscovered. See GA 740b3–5, 778b23–5.
20. Hamlyn [1976], 169–71, emphasizes the connexion between epagôgê and the exposition or explanation of general
principles by appeal to particular cases. I do not think this view of epagôgê adequately explains the role Aristotle
ascribes to it in advancing from gnôrima hêmin to gnôrima phusei. If Aristotle did not ascribe epagôgê a role in the
process of discovery, he would have given no account of the process at all.
Engberg-Pederson [1979], 301–7, rightly resists the suggestion that ‘epagôgê’ has different senses in its different
uses. He denies that epagôgê involves inference, and takes that to explain why ‘the question of the validity of a given
piece of epagôgê never arises for Aristotle’. It could hardly follow that the question of the legitimacy or justiﬁability
of a given piece of epagôgê could not arise; on the contrary, the more widely epagôgê ranges, the more important it
becomes to decide if a given piece of epagôgê has been reasonable or justiﬁable.
21. When Aristotle suggests that the only ways of teaching and learning are induction and demonstration, APo
81a38–b6, 92a34–b3, Phys. 252a24–5, Met. 992b31–3 (adding horismos as a way of learning), he perhaps uses
‘learning’ and ‘teaching’ in a narrow sense, for the exposition of an existing body of knowledge rather than for the
result of an inquiry that produces new knowledge. When he says that learning requires syllogism or induction, he
should be using ‘learning’ in a broader sense to include discovery (perhaps suggested by APo 71a9–11). Otherwise
his different remarks seem inconsistent.
22. The result of induction will be a universal conclusion; and sometimes Aristotle is willing to call the inference with
this result an inductive syllogism, APr 68b15–29; he implies, (cf. 68b13–14) a relaxation of the normal conditions
for a syllogism, which must have universal premisses. Aristotle recognizes that the conclusion of an induction is
universal, APo 92a39, and that enumeration of particular cases does not normally allow a deductive inference
about the universal, APo 86a3–8. Still, he thinks

492

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

28.

29.

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

NOTES

induction involves an incomplete enumeration of cases, e.g. Top. 105a13–16, and reaches the universal, APo
81a38–b9, 88a1–3, 90a28–30.
On explanatory properties see § 63–4.
Conﬂict with appearances: see also DC 293a25–8, 297a4–6, 306a6–17, GC 325a17–29, 331a7–10, b24–5,
336b15–19, Metr. 344a5–9, GA 729b22–3, 756a3–6, 757b34–758a4, 759a25–7, 760b28–30, 765a25–9.
The contrast between ‘what appears authoritatively to perception’ and perceptual appearances as a whole (cf. DC
306a3–5) implies that not all perceptual appearances are authoritative, and that a theory need not be rejected
simply because it conﬂicts with non-authoritative ones.
Simp. 643.11–12, says reasonably that the telos is ‘truth in appearances in accordance with perception that is
authoritative and correct’.
‘Yielding’ the appearances: see Met. 1073b36–7, 1074a1; cf. Phys. 189a16–17, Metr. 365a34–7. Appearances as
‘witnesses’ or evidence for the theory: Phys. 213b21, Metr. 350b19–20, 360a34, PN 460a26–8, PA 666a22–4, GA
721b28–9, 725b4–7, 727a31–3, 771b8–10. Non-perceptual appearances as witnesses: DC 279a33, Metr.
359a17–21.
On eulogon see Le Blond [1939], 241–3, Aubenque [1966], 86f. What is plausible is different from what is necessary,
GA 763a3–7, Met. 1074a14–17; hence the theory is not required to show that only these appearances could be
consistent with it. But a good theory should show that it is reasonable to expect the appearances we actually ﬁnd,
Metr. 341a29–32, PN 446a7–10, a28–b2, PA 667b6–10, GA 715b7–16, 725b6, 728a25–31, 729a9–14, 731a24–39,
753a27–30, 761a14–19. The theory and the appearances agree with each other in so far as the theory gives an
account of the appearances that happen, DC 270b5–6, 284a12–13, 292a15–23, b25–8, PN 468a20–5, 469a23–b1,
GA 760b17–22, Met. 1087b1–3.
It is clear that attention to a wide range of appearances will expose conﬂicts, DC 293a23–30, 303a20–4, 306a6–17,
26–30, GC 325a13–16, GA 747a26–30. Aristotle acknowledges that in some cases—the heavens being an obvious
example—we do not have all the appearances we would like, DC 270b13–17, 287b29–288a12, 291b24–8,
292a15–19, Metr. 344a5–9, PA 644b22–645a4.
A theory should ‘cohere’, suneirein, over a wide range of appearances: GC 316a5–10; cf. Met. 986a6–8, 1093b25–9,
Top. 158a36–7, GA 716a2–4.
In Aristotle's view, we should be looking for them, and making a positive effort to test our theory by them, PA
644b30–2, GA 760b30–3.
On Aristotle's realism about perception see § 163.
On foundationalism see § 71.
On self-evidence see § § 35, 72.
Alex. 29.18–30.12 recognizes that the reference to ﬁrst principles looks like a fourth purpose of dialectic, but
argues reasonably that it may be counted in the third. At 32.9–10 he rightly connects exetastikê with zêtein and
epicheirein. Contrast Brunschwig [1967] 116f, who disagrees with Alexander partly because of the use of kata
philosophian in a27, 34, as opposed to peri hekastên epistêmên, a37; but the reference to philosophia (cf. 7n14) just
distinguishes science from dialectic.

NOTES

493

36. Aristotle also distinguishes arguments (1) for gymnastic purposes, (2) for testing, peira, and examination, skepsis,
and (3) for teaching, 159a25–8 (for peirastic cf. 161a24, 165b4, 169b24, 170b11, 172a35–6, 183b1). Only the third
function (cf. 143a30, 171b1) seems to correspond to the constructive function of dialectic in ﬁnding ﬁrst
principles. Aristotle sometimes associates teaching and learning with the exposition of a completed science, and so
with demonstration rather than dialectic, 165a38–b11 (cf. 155b10–16, APo 91b15–17; see above n21). But he
seems to recognize dialectical argument as constructive and hence as a source of a different sort of learning. At any
rate, he recognizes rules for some dialectical argument that seem unsuitable for peirastic and gymnastic. Since
peirastic seeks to test someone else's claim to knowledge, it depends on what seems true to the respondent, and the
tester is allowed to use premisses he believes to be false, 161a24–9, and to reach false conclusions, 169b25–7; but
dialectic is sometimes held to the requirement of sincerity that applies to teaching, 156b6–9.
37. For ‘undertake’ or ‘deal with’ (epicheirein) cf. 162a16, epicheirêma, where it is a dialectical as opposed to a
demonstrative syllogism, 158b1.
The systematic practice of gymnastic and peirastic (as opposed to constructive) functions of dialectic are probably
intended at Met. 1078b25–7, on which see Wilpert [1956], who suggests reasonably that 987b32–3 attributes the
constructive use of dialectic to Plato.
38. On exetazein cf. Top. 164a8–15 (and De Pater [1965], 82), EE 1215a4–8, EN 1095a28–30 (see 16n1), Met. 1091a19.
In 1095a29–30, tas malista epipolazousas, shows that exetastikê in 101b3 refers to and explains dia de tôn peri hekasta
endoxôn in b1. The connexion of exetasis with the exposure (emphanisis) of conﬂicts in someone's beliefs is made clear
in Rhet. Alex. 1427b12–30.
39. On ‘redirect’, metabibazein, cf. EE 1216b30, Top. 157a29ff, Thurot [1860], 198f.
40. The constructive function of dialectic is emphasized by Wilpert [1956], 250f, citing 171b3–7 (esp. kata to pragma,
b6), Rhet. 1355b15–21. See also De Pater [1965], 78–80, Le Blond [1939], 44–7, Wieland [1970], 216ff, Aubenque
[1966], 258f, Weil [1951], 99, Happ [1971], 58–81.
Grote [1872], i.286f, takes a limited view of the function of dialectic. He renders the claim about having a hodos by
‘is connected by some threads with the principia of all the various scientiﬁc researches’. This rendering supports
Grote's generally unfavourable estimate of dialectic in general, i.95–108. His estimate partly reﬂects his opposition
to Plato's attack on sophistic, and partly reﬂects his failure to notice that dialectical evaluation of premisses requires
some judgment about their reasonableness (see Greenwood, cited at 1n15). Grote's generally negative view of
Platonic and Aristotelian dialectic is shared by Hamelin [1920], 231–5. A similarly limited view is defended by De
Blic [1930]. He speaks as though evidence for the claim that (1) dialectical techniques may be used for other
purposes than ﬁnding the truth, were evidence for the claim that (2) dialectic cannot be a method for systematic
pursuit of the truth. The difference between the

494

41.
42.

43.
44.

45.
46.

NOTES

two claims is helpfully brought out by Raphael [1974], 164f. See also Descartes, quoted in § 84.
Owen [1961] defends the second answer; see 7n10.
On endoxa see Top. 100b21, 104a8–12, 165b3–4, 170a33, 40, b7–11, APo 81b18–20, Met. 995b23–4. Aristotle uses
‘endoxon’ to suggest both that something is widely held and that it is also respectable, with something to be said for
it, APr 62a11–19, 70a3–4, Rhet. 1355a14–18, 1356b28–35, Top. 161b34–8 (cf. Rhet. 1355b8–17). Brunschwig
[1967], 113f, gives a good account of endoxa, which he renders by ‘idées admises’. See also Weil [1951], 97. Raphael
[1974], Barnes [1981a], 498–500, render endoxa as reputable things', so that to call a belief endoxon is to say (not
merely, as I have said, to convey or suggest) that it deserves a good reputation. I doubt if this is justiﬁed as a
translation. (The connexion of doxa with reputation does not imply that ‘reputable’ as opposed to ‘reputed’ is the
right translation; a reputed thief is not necessarily a reputable thief.) If Aristotle meant to say, in using the term
itself, that to be endoxon is to deserve a good reputation, it would be surprising that he so often treats the terms
endoxon and phainomenon or legomenon as equivalent, since these other terms lack the implication of desert that is
present in the very meaning of endoxon, as Barnes understands it.
Le Blond [1939], 9–17, considers ‘probable’ and ‘plausible’ as renderings of endoxon, and thinks both capture
aspects of its sense. His argument, like Barnes's, insufﬁciently distinguishes the sense of the word from what might
readily be conveyed or suggested by the use of it. See also Régis [1935], 81–8, De Pater [1965], 74–6.
Cf. Top. 104a3–11, b22–4, EN 1095a28–30, Rhet. 1356b35–7. Common beliefs reﬂect the consensus of many
people about the same questions on many occasions, DC 270b17–21.
Aristotle acknowledges readily that we may not be able to show that all the common beliefs are true, though we
should prove the truth of most of them and the most authoritative, EN 1145b1ff; see § 12. For false endoxa cf.
perhaps Phys. 253b29, 254a6, 17. He is less ready to assume the truth of the common beliefs, saying instead that
they seem to be correct, e.g. Phys. 208a34, 210b33, 211a9, though sometimes he seems not to distinguish the
appearances from the actual facts, EN 1098a8–12, DA 403b24–5.
Appeals to common beliefs in works that also use empirical methods: see e.g. DC 279a30–3, 297a3–6, 303a20–4
(referring to Phys. 231a18ff), Le Blond [1939], 251f.
Aristotle divides dialectical questions and propositions into three types—logical, physical, and ethical, Top.
105b19–29. Here the logical questions are of the type discussed in the Topics, belonging to no special subject-matter
any more than to another, while the other questions are especially relevant to physics and to ethics. For this use of
‘logical’ see the reference to the categories, APo 82b35–6; to general views about the syllogism, 88a18–19; the
distinction between potential and actual, EN 1147a24; the concept of essence, Met. 1029b13, 1041a28. See also
Top. 180a26–9, APo 86a22, Met. 1005b20–2, 1087b18–21, 1090a9–11, EE 1221b4–8. They are contrasted

NOTES

47.
48.

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

495

with the arguments from the appropriate subject matter, analytics, APo 84a38, 88a30, or the aspects of human
nature relevant to ethics, EN 1147a24; cf. 1167b17–30, 1168a8, 1170a13–14. In these cases it is unwise to assume
that the logical argument is being contrasted with a non-dialectical argument.
Dialectic relies on common ‘places’ or ‘topics’, those that are not conﬁned to a particular science or discipline. See
Top. 171b6–7, 172a11–21, APo 77a29–35, Rhet. 1355b25–34, 1356a27–33, 1358a1–35, 1359b12–16.
Sometimes the logical argument is not completely general, as it is in the Topics, but belongs to the area being
studied. It differs from the ‘special’ arguments in relying less heavily on the appearances and principles appropriate
to that area of study, and relying more on some general assumptions being applied to a particular case, Phys.
202a21–b5, 204b4–10, 264a7, b2, DC 275b12, 280a33–4, GC 316a5–14, 335b24–7, GA 747b27–748a17. Such
logical assumptions and arguments might be counted in the Topics as physical or ethical. (This point is not
adequately considered by Le Blond [1939], 193–212, Rodier [1900], ii. 26.)
Uses of logical argument: DC 275b12, 280a33–4. Criticisms: Top. 178b36–9, DC 306a7–9, GC 315a33–4,
316a5–14, 325a14 (contrast Phys. 262a18; cf. 188a3), 335b24–6, DA 402b16–403a3, GA 747b27–748a17, Met.
987b29–32, 1050b34–6, 1069a27–8, 1084b23–5, EE 1217b21–2. See also 7n15.
On euporia and its association with movement forward on a road cf. APr 46b22–5, DC 291b24–8 (OT translates,
‘where it is very difﬁcult to see one's way’), DA 403b21–2, Owens [1963], 214n. It is also connected with another
aspect of not being at a loss—being well supplied, Top. 163b4–9, Met. 993a26–7.
On the importance of a preliminary survey of the puzzles see DA 403b20–4, Met. 995a24–b4, EN 1145b3–5,
1146b6–8, EE 1214a12, 1215a5–7.
This account of a puzzle is explained by 145a37–b7, 162a17–18.
This issue about raising puzzles is discussed by Evans [1977], 80f, citing 159a37–b35, who does not exactly answer
the issue about puzzles, but perhaps suggests the answer.
Objective puzzles: Phys. 202b30–203a4, 208a32–b1, 217b29–32, DC 294b6–13, Met. 995a25–7, Aubenque [1961],
7, 9. see § 14.
Beliefs taken to be evidently true, but raising puzzles: Phys. 209a29–30, 217b32–3.
Empirical puzzles in a dialectical work: DA 413b16, 417a21. On the Politics see 16n16.
On conﬂicting appearances and scepticism see §se 84, 104.
see § 105.
Aristotle's readiness to consider rejection of the endoxa is underestimated by Aubenque [1961], 13, and Barker
(quoted 16n20).
Comparisons and contrasts between empirical and dialectical method: Le Blond [1939], 196f.
Cf. DA 413a11–16, Met. 993b7–11, 1029b3–12, EN 1138b25–34, EE 1216b33–9. We want an explanation of the
initial appearances, EN 1095b2–8, EE 1216b35–9.

496

NOTES

62. We are initially familiar with some examples of things to which the name applies, but do not know the difference
between men and fathers; and the deﬁnition reaches the ‘particulars’ in so far as it articulates the features that
something must have for the name to apply to it, 184a26–b14. The argument of Phys. i, similarly, begins with a
fairly undifferentiated notion of an ‘origin’ or ‘ﬁrst principle’, and of the different things that seem to be ﬁrst
principles; it gradually explains what is required for something to be an origin, and what different sorts of origins
there are.
Aristotle says his task is to ﬁnd the principles of scientiﬁc knowledge (taking tês . . . epistêmês, 184a14–15, with archas,
a16, with Ross [1936] and Simp. 10.1–2, Phil. 9.1–3). He does not claim to be expounding scientiﬁc knowledge in
the Phys. (though Porphyry and Simplicius suppose that he is engaged in ﬁrst philosophy; see Simp. 9.10–27, citing
193a34–b1, on which see 8n1).
Simp. 14.30–16.13 and Phil. 9.6–10.22 try to connect Aristotle's claims about the gnôrima hêmin and gnôrima phusei
with his account of demonstrative reasoning in the APo. They do not consider the possibility that he is practising
dialectic here. See also Le Blond [1939], 286–8, Konstan [1975].
63. Induction in dialectical argument: Catg. 13b37–14a1, Phys. 185a12–14, 244b3, Met. 1048a35–b4, 1054b32–1055a2,
1055a5–6, 1055b17, 1058a8–9, EE 219a1–2, 1220a23–9, 1220b30–3, 1248b25–7. Induction and logos: Top.
105a10–19, Phys. 210b8, 229b2, PA 646a30, Met. 1055b17, 1058a9, EE 1220b30. Wilpert [1956], 254, connects
induction and dialectic too closely.
64. Undisputed huparchonta: Phys. 200b26–8, 208a34, 210b33, 211a19, 218b9–219b2, EN 1155b17–18, 1174a13–14,
EE 1226a17–b9, 1235b24–7, 31–3.
65. On making a new start see §se 94, 111, 192.
66. See Alex. in Top. 27.24–31.
67. Some argumentative tactics are rejected as non-dialectical altogether: 108a26–37, 112a7–11. For further discussion
see Owen [1968], 223–5.
68. Argumentative tactics (see further Moraux [1968]):
(1) Appeals to etymology (112a32–8; contrast 148b16–22) perhaps force the interlocutor to say he is using the
word in its usual sense, 112a34.
(2) We may propose a non-convertible property of a subject as the genus, even though we may object if someone
else does this, 128a38–b6. Since it is not always clear when such a property is not the genus, though clearly
sometimes it is not, the attitude of each side is defensible.
(3) We should ask whether F is the deﬁnition of G without mentioning that Fs are homonymous; it is the defender's
task to mention this in his defence of a deﬁnition, 148a37–b4.
(4) Padding an argument with irrelevancies makes it harder for the answerer to realize what he commits himself to.
(Padding: 155b24–8, 157a1–5. Concealment; 156a7, 156b8–157a6; see § 100.) This may be necessary if the
interlocutor is to reveal his real commitments instead of trying to protect himself against refutation.
(5) If we say that something is customarily said, the interlocutor will be reluctant to dissent unless he has a speciﬁc
counterexample, 156b20–3.

NOTES

497

The onus is thrown on the interlocutor, but nothing false or deceptive is said.
(6) We should propose something as universally true if it is true in many instances and no obvious objection
appears, 158b3–6.
69. Objections, enstaseis: Top. 153a31–b8, APr ii 26, Rhet. 1402b13–1403a1, DC 294b6–13, Phys. 253a32–b6. They may
aim at the speaker or at his way of asking questions, Top. 161a1–15, or at the argument itself, 160b33–9; cf.
161a14–15. Aristotle considers only the last kind. Sometimes he mentions an objection without comment, 123b17,
27, 34, 124b19, 32, 125a1, 32, 128b6. Sometimes he seems to endorse it, 146b13–19 (cf. 121a30–9), 150b7–13,
15–19, 153b4–12 (cf. 157b14–23). Sometimes he rejects it in whole or part, 115b14–24, b24–9; cf. 156a27–b3,
157a34–b2. Even if a reasonable objection can eventually be shown to be false, this may be a waste of time if the
claim provoking the objection is not necessary for our main thesis.
70. Conﬂicts with appearances: Phys. 253b29, 254a8, GC 315a4, 325a16–23, 26, 28, DA 418b20–6, Met. 1091a6, EN
1096a1–2, 1145b27–31, EE 1236a25–33.
71. If ha pasi (OCT) rather than ho pasi is read, then agathon is the probable complement (so Burnet [1900] ad loc.), and
the passage does not express acceptance of universal agreement as a mark of truth. (Appeals to universal
agreement are discussed by Kirwan [1981].) Contrast Stewart [1892], Heliodorus 211.26–7, Michael 537.32–3
(whose paraphrases both suggest ho), Owen [1961], 243, Grote [1872], ii.276–8. Aristotle's attitude to universal
agreement in EN 1098b27–9, Phys. 196a14–17 is quite cautious.
72. On self-evidence see § 72.
73. see § 19.
74. He rejects empty theories: EE 1216b40–1217a9, 1217b21–4. The theory should ‘yield’ the appearances: Phys.
211a7–12, EN 1145b4–6, EE 1236a25–33. The appearances should ‘witness’ to the truth of the theory, Phys.
265b17–19, Met. 1069a25–6, EN 1103b2–6, 1113b21–6, 1154b7–9, Pol. 1338a35–7, 1340b5–7.
75. This fulﬁls the promise in 1216b28–32. On making the appearances seem reasonable cf. Phys. 220b22–8, Met.
1026b4–14, EN 1153a23–7, EE 1245b9–13, Pol. 1279a32–b4. Often the way to make them seem reasonable is to
draw a distinction, dihorismos: see EN 1104b24, 1168b12, 1169b23, Eucken [1870], 13.
76. Importance of puzzles: DA 408a11–24, Met. 991a8–b1, 1063b30–5, 1076b39–1077a20, 1085a3–9, a26–b7,
1085b34–1086a18, EN 1096a10–11, a34–b3, 1097a8–13.
77. Solutions proceed on different lines (see also Aubenque [1961], 14):
(1) Sometimes Aristotle attacks the reasoning that leads to one side of the puzzle, and so rejects the conclusion.
(2) Sometimes he accepts the argument for a puzzle, and agrees that it requires some change in the claim that raises
the puzzle, APo 91a12, 99b20–100a3.
(3) An apparently absurd conclusion from an appearance is not absurd,

498

NOTES

and so gives no reason for rejecting the initial appearance, Met. 1004a31–b1, 1061b11–17, MM 1200b20–5,
1201b1–1202a18, Pol. 1277b39–1278a1.
(4) Apparently contradictory conclusions (e.g. that pleasure is good and that it is not good) are not contradictory
after all.
(5) Sometimes Aristotle combines (1) and (4). He suggests that if the conclusions are taken to be genuinely
contradictory the arguments are unsound, but the arguments are sound if the conclusions are qualiﬁed in a way
that removes any contradiction: Phys. 194a15–b15, EN ix 3, Pol. 1268b33–1269a28.
78. Here ‘as a whole’ and ‘any experience’ are important. Every concept and belief might reasonably be said to be used
to interpret and understand some experience. But not every concept is used to interpret and understand the
experience in the light of which it might be modiﬁed (e.g. our assumptions about ﬁsh did not wholly control the
experience in the light of which we found that whales are not ﬁsh).
79. The problem emerges especially sharply from Wilpert's claim, [1956], 253, that ‘Der Methode nach ist der
Dialektiker, so könnte man es überspitzt vielleicht formulieren, Sophist 〈sc. because he deals in appearances〉,
der Intention nach Philosoph’ 〈sc. because he seeks objective truth〉. The question is how such a method can
fulﬁl such an intention. A defence appealing to Aristotelian teleology is considered by Barnes [1981a].
80. Hamelin [1920], 234, remarks, quite plausibly, that if ﬁrst principles were made to rest on dialectic, ‘Aristote
puiserait les principes des sciences dans les opinions, et non dans les choses’. See also 9n37.

Chapter 3
1. Malcolm [1981], 663, 666, supposes that different predicables are meant to belong to different categories, so that,
e.g., genus and deﬁnition belong to the ﬁrst category. This view is not required if two lists of categories are not
required. See n36. For further discussion see Kosman [1966].
2. New starts: § 22.
3. Dialectical terms: see 4a22, enstasis; 8a13, b23–4, 15a18–20, aporia; 3b13–14, schêma tês prosêgorias, 3a29–31, 11a20,
tarattein. Further parallels are noted by Husik [1952a], 98–106. See n10.
4. 2a4–10, DI 16a9–16, DA 432a11–12, Plato, Sph. 262bc, on truth and falsity suggest that 1a16, 1b25 refer to words
(though, as Kahn [1978], 256f, remarks, signiﬁers need not always be words). 1a16, 20 also seem to contrast words
with things. On signiﬁcation see Irwin [1982], 243–8.
5. Simp. in Catg. 9.4–13.18, summarizes the different views about the Catg.: (a) It is about words, 9.8–19. (b) It is
about things, 9.19–30. (c) It is about thoughts, 9.30–10.5 (d) It is about words, but in so far as they signify things.
In modern discussion (a) is defended by Trendelenburg [1846], e.g. 23f,

NOTES

499

criticized at length by Bonitz [1853], 621–40. Simplicius traces (d) back to Alexander (cf. Porphyry, in Catg.
58.21–9), and favours it himself, 13.11–18; he argues that it explains why Aristotle begins with words, but
continues with things. This view differs from (a) in considering words only as signiﬁers (i.e. apart from their
internal structure), and differs from (b) in so far as Aristotle is not committed to the reality of the ‘beings’ signiﬁed
by the simple words, but only points out that they are what words purport to refer to; signiﬁcation involves only
ostensible realities—‘for things are not revealed by the categories in so far as they are in actual existence, hupostasis,
but only in so far as they are thought of, either beings or 〈thought of〉 as beings’, 11.10–12. This is how
Simplicius explains the fact that the Catg. belongs only to logic, not to ﬁrst philosophy studying being qua being; cf.
9.28–30, 104.6–14. I think he misinterprets the distinction between logical inquiry and ﬁrst philosophy; see § 94.
The same conception of the distinction between logic and ﬁrst philosophy underlies the account of the Catg. in
Owens [1960], 79. Owens argues that the Catg. belongs to ‘logic’ in so far as it speaks of saying and predicating,
and to ‘metaphysics’ in so far as it speaks of being. He explains the double aspect by appeal to the claim that ﬁrst
and second substance belong to the logical order, while only substantial form (neither universal nor particular)
belongs to the real order. This explanation hardly shows why Aristotle speaks of second substances as beings, and
uses the very same term ‘subject’ for ﬁrst substance both in the Catg. and in the Met. Owens is also committed to a
non-realist interpretation of universals in the Met., on which see 12n50.
The main objection to Simplicius and Owens is Aristotle's complete failure to indicate any of the appropriate
reservations about the truth of his conclusions. Such reservations would make it hard to understand why he uses
the apparatus of the Catg. not only in the Met. but also in the Analytics and in his natural philosophy, and in the
criticism of other philosophers. (A similar objection arises against Bonitz's attempt, [1853], 607f, to distinguish the
empirical character of the doctrine of the categories from the more strictly ontological doctrine involving form and
matter; see also 4n9.) It would be curiously feeble to criticize Plato's or Democritus' metaphysical claims on
grounds that Aristotle himself admits are not necessarily a guide to the real nature of things. (The question about
Plato does not escape the Neoplatonic critics; see e.g. Simp. 7.29–32.)
6. I see no support for Moravcsik's view, [1967a], 131f, that Aristotle intends each one of the things said without
combination to signify an item in only one category. Only an uncompounded item has to be in only one category,
and not all things said ‘without combination’ in the syntactical sense signify something uncompounded.
7. If Aristotle assumes that all non-substances are properties of substances, a complete list of the possible properties
of substances will also be a complete list of non-substances. He might reasonably consider the different
interrogative expressions corresponding to these different questions as a guide to different possible properties. If,
however, Aristotle's main aim

500

NOTES

were to classify the questions or the interrogative expressions themselves (raising questions about a man; see
Ackrill [1963], 78f, Malcolm [1981], 662f, Gillespie [1925], 8f, Kahn [1978], 262), we would expect masculine
adjectives (dipêchus, leukos, etc.) in the answers. The neuters we actually get are explicable if Aristotle is asking the
same question as in Top. 103b29–35, about substantial and non-substantial items.
8. At Top. 107a3–12 (cf. EN 1096a23–9, EE 1217b26–38, Ackrill [1972], 21f) Aristotle argues that goods are
homonymous because goodness differs according to the different categories of being; it is hard to believe that he
does not intend, here as elsewhere, to mark a similar homonymy in beings. (In Top. 107a3 Aristotle does not say
exactly why it is relevant to consider the ‘genera of predicates’, ta genê tôn . . . katêgoriôn; but it is plainly relevant if
the categories indicate the homonymy of being, which then infects good with homonymy.) Elsewhere he
recognizes the homonymy of being, 182b13–27. Just as the question ‘What is it?’ requires a different type of
answer according to the category of the item considered, so also the statement ‘x is F’ must be understood
differently according to the category of x, and being will be deﬁned differently according to the categories.
The homonymy of being is connected with the categories in APr 49a6–10, APo 88b1–3, Phys. 185a20–6, EE
1217b27–8, Met. 992b18–24, iv 2, v 7, 11, vii 1. But we need not regard the connexion as a later innovation; we are
entitled to use it to explain the point of the categories in the Catg. and Top. as well. The homonymy of being is
discussed at length by Owen [1960], [1965a]. See also Leszl [1970], Loux [1973].
Devereux [1985], 236f, rejects this use of the argument about good, and denies that in the Org. Aristotle recognizes
the categorial homonymy of being. If, however, Aristotle does not think being is homonymous, he overlooks the
fact that his argument about goods allows the construction of an exactly parallel argument about beings. Moreover,
his own account of the categories in connexion with the ‘What is it?’ question (in Top. i 9) makes the strategy of the
parallel argument easy to conceive, and it is quite surprising if he fails to see this. Admittedly, he never explicitly
denies that the different answers to the ‘What is it?’ question ultimately lead back to one answer specifying the
synonymous way in which all the different categorial items are beings. But he never offers such an answer, and his
other arguments about goods and beings make it unlikely that he thinks there is one.
9. Aristotle assumes, perhaps, that grasping the sense of a word is grasping an appropriate series of inferences about,
e.g., the genus or the contrary of the referent. If different uses of the term are associated with different inferences,
that is a good reason for seeing a difference of sense. This sort of argument explains Aristotle's claim to ﬁnd
homonymy in such terms as ‘sharp’ and ‘light’, Top. 106a9–22, b1–20, 106b34–107a2, 107a18–21, b6–12. Irwin
[1981] discusses homonymy more fully.
10. Aristotle recognizes that ordinary names often fail to correspond to important kinds, but he does not want to
reject ordinary names, or most common-sense views about their referents. He criticizes those who

NOTES

501

‘legislate’, who reject ordinary views about Fs because these do not apply to Fs as picked out by the favoured single
deﬁnition, 148b16–22; see Alexander in Top. 181.2–6. Aristotle's preferred solution accepts the ordinary name,
104b36, 109a29, 110a16, 140a3, APo 98a13, PA 644b1, and recognizes the important differences by recognizing
homonymy, EN 1129a26–31, EE 1236a23–32. See also § 219.
11. These limitations of appeals to multivocity become important in the Met. See 8n37.
12. In Aristotle's view Plato's fatal mistake is his assumption that ‘tall’ refers to some tall object, not a dog or a horse or
any ordinary tall object, but still something that is tall. Aristotle thinks he can show that Plato cannot describe any
object that could possibly meet his conditions for the Form; every tall object, e.g., must have some determinate
size, but the Form of Tall cannot have any. Plato's theory illustrates the dangers of having no doctrine of
categories; for (as Aristotle interprets him) Plato ﬁrst distinguishes the tall object from its tallness, but then regards
its tallness as a second tall object, simply reduplicating the thing he wanted to understand (cf. Met. 990a34–b4). In
distinguishing the categories Aristotle wants to show how Plato's mistake is to be avoided.
In Plato's view the substances are separated non-sensible Forms, on which sensible things depend for their existence
and character; and these basic realities correspond both to men and dogs, items in Aristotle's category of
substance, and to white and tallness, Aristotelian non-substances. Aristotle, however, distinguishes substances
from non-substances by distinguishing (roughly speaking) sensible objects from their properties. He agrees with
Plato about the role that substances should play in relation to other beings; but he thinks a subset of ordinary
sensible beings can play that role without appeal to non-sensible beings.
Though Aristotle uses his doctrines to criticize Plato's Theory of Forms, there is no good reason to believe that he
devises his doctrine with these controversial aims in mind. Such aims are rather overstated by Gillespie [1925], and
Owen [1965], 206f. On Aristotle's attitude to Plato's dialectic see § 76.
13. Gillespie [1925], 7, rightly stresses the connexion between the Catg. and the Top.; see also n3 above. But he infers
that ‘if it 〈sc. the doctrine of the categories〉 owes its origin to the logical analysis of predication, its primary
meaning is to be sought in such passages rather than in those where it is extended to scientiﬁc and philosophical
questions’. Here he seems to me to assume a distinction corresponding to nothing in Aristotle, and to mislead us
about the character of Aristotle's interests. Dialectic often relies on some general ontological views about the
presence of natural kinds in the world, and about their signiﬁcant properties.
14. On central common beliefs about substance see Dancy [1975a], 346. The passages in the Met. might reﬂect views
that differ from those in the Catg.; but they are the best available evidence.
15. Aristotle allows elsewhere that these are thought to be the most obvious candidates for substance: 1028b8–15; cf.
1001b32–1002a4.

502

NOTES

16. On Met. v 8 see further 10n15.
17. Top. i 9 seems to include four lists of ten: (1) 103b21–3; (2) b26–7; (3) b28–9; (4) b37–9; and we may add (5) the
list in Catg. 4. I take all ﬁve lists to list the same things, though this assumption is challenged by Frede [1981],
Malcolm [1981], Kapp [1920]. The last nine items seem to be the same in all ﬁve lists; List 2 mentions the last
seven items as tôn allôn tina katêgoriôn, 103b26–7, and List 3 uses the same phrase, 103b29, suggesting that both lists
list the same items.
This suggestion is sometimes resisted because List 3 is headed by substance and the other three lists in the Top. are
headed by what-is-it. In List 3 the ten items beginning with substance provide ten ways of answering that ‘what is
it?’ question, suggesting that List 3 provides ten answers that fall in the ﬁrst category of the other lists. On this
view, however, Aristotle would offer two vitally different types of lists, whereas his other remarks invite us to
identify them. List 3 corresponds to the other lists if we can explain why ‘what-is-it’ should be used especially for
the category of substance, as opposed to the others, even though the others also answer the what-is-it question.
18. This division ignores the problem of differentiae, which do not seem to ﬁt into any category. see § 38.
19. He speaks of particulars, e.g. 2a36, b3, 8b3, and intends ‘the individual man’ (literally ‘the some man’) to pick out a
particular. He also calls this subject ‘undivided and numerically one’, 1b6–7; numerical unity is apparently identiﬁed
with being a this (tode ti), 3b10–13; and being a this is identiﬁed with being a particular, 8b3–6. On thisness see
10n34.
20. Water taken from the same spring is one in species, not in number (103a14–23); presumably it fails to be one in
number because it includes many bucketfuls or pools. See 12nn27, 30.
21. If there were no non-substantial particulars, the non-substance categories would not include particulars as the
category of substance does, and there would be no particulars whose essential properties belong in the nonsubstance categories; but his exposition of the categories in the Topics assumes that they answer the question ‘What
is it?’ and so reveal essential properties of different things. Aristotle supposes, reasonably, that if the category of
substance reveals an essential property of particular substances, he has a good reason for making the parallel claim
about non-substances.
Since individual non-substances are particulars, they must be numerically one, and therefore cannot inhere in more
than one particular substance. Particular relatives include particular slaves and fathers, each of whom inheres in
only one particular substance, Catg. 6b28–30, and when Aristotle refers to particular relatives, 8b13–15, these
particulars limited to one particular substance seem to be intended. Similarly, when he says the same numerically
one action cannot be both good and bad, he ought to be referring to an action-token; the point would not be
correct for an action-type, 4a15–16. We have several good reasons to believe, and no good reason to deny, that
Aristotle recognizes one particular non-substance

NOTES

503

inhering in each particular substance to which one characterizing adjective is truly applied.
This conception of particular non-substances is presented by Ackrill [1963], 74. It is challenged by Owen [1965b],
and the issue has often been discussed. See Matthews and Cohen [1967], Allen [1969], [1973], Duerlinger [1970],
Jones [1972], Annas [1974], Hartman [1977], 14f, Frede [1978], and especially Heinaman [1981] (the fullest
discussion of the evidence and problems). Owen's view requires a ‘particular’ white to be a fully determinate shade
of white. DI 17a39 might seem to imply that such a thing is a universal; this conclusion may be resisted only if we
suppose, with some strain, that epi in that passage implies kata, in the Catg. sense. Owen offers no evidence to show
that Aristotle will count anything like this as numerically one; indeed the tests for numerical unity seem to exclude
Owen's account (see Duerlinger, 188). Some criticisms of particular non-substances (see Moore [1923], followed
by Owen) are unduly harsh.
This debate about particular non-substances has often invoked 2b1–3. Ackrill, 83, suggests that Aristotle's
formulation is ‘compressed and careless’, since he should say that an individual instance of colour, not colour itself,
is inherent in an individual body. Owen, 254, appeals to this passage to argue against Ackrill's conception of
particular non-substances; the argument is developed more fully by Frede, 58–61. However, the passage makes
good sense if it means that colour is inherent in some individual body or other, not that it is inherent in this or that
individual body. (See esp. Frede, whose argument requires colour to be inherent in each particular body (e.g. this
cube) rather than simply in some body or other (this cube or that sphere or . . . ).) This is how we must take ‘the
individual man’ in 2a36–b1 (cf. Owen, 257); see 4n20. Once we see this, the passage raises no objection to Ackrill's
view of 1a24–5 (and does not require the two senses of ‘in’ suggested by Duerlinger, 186f). Recognition of nonsubstance particulars is quite important for understanding Aristotle's belief in the priority of ﬁrst substance; see
10n6–7.
It is amusing to see the warmth that debates about non-substance particulars provoke in some philosophers. See
Berlin [1973], 8: ‘〈Austin:〉 “If there are three vermilion patches on this piece of paper, how many vermilions
are there?” “One”, said I. “I say there are three”, said Austin, and we spent the rest of the term on the issue.’
Unfortunately Berlin does not say what conclusion, if any, they reached.
22. See e.g. 8b27, 9a14, 28, 10a11, 11a23. Aristotle does not use the term ‘universal’ in the Catg.; but his normal
deﬁnition of a universal makes it clear that whatever is predicated of a subject (substance or non-substance) that is
numerically one is a universal (cf. DI 17a39).
23. ‘In’ appears in the explanation as well as in the expression to be explained, apparently making the explanation
circular. But without this clause inherence would just be existential dependence of something that is not a part; and
such existential dependence, in Aristotle's view, follows from strong predication, 2b5–6c. The ﬁrst clause of the
deﬁnition of inherence should show why second substances cannot be inherent.

504

24.

25.

26.

27.

NOTES

Ackrill, 74, offers examples to illustrate ‘belonging in’ without appeal to paronymy. Duerlinger [1970], 185, denies
that ‘in’ is needed in the explanation; but his alternative implies that, e.g., an individual man inheres in oxygen.
On paronymy see Phys. 207b8–10, Ross [1936] ad loc. (his explanation, however, is doubtful; see Hussey [1983]),
245b9–12, EE 1228a35–6, Top. 109b1–9, 111a33–b4 (cf. 114a27–32, 106b33–107a2), Ackrill, 72. Paronymy
cannot be merely a grammatical relation between words (as suggested by Owen [1960], 21; Owens [1963], 111).
For Catg. 10a27–b11 shows that paronymy requires that (a) the adjective ‘F’ is applied to the subject x from the
quality (or other non-substance) y, and (b) the name of y is ‘F-ness’ or otherwise grammatically related to ‘F’. In the
case of the excellent, spoudaios, person and virtue, (a) is true, but (b) is not. The ontological relation in (a) is
therefore not reducible to the grammatical relation in (b). I will sometimes speak of paronymy with (a) rather than
(b) in mind. The non-linguistic aspects of paronymy are stressed by Jones [1975], 120 (without reference to 10a27).
These facts about paronymy undermine some of the objections (by Owen, Owens, Kahn [1978], 273n50) to the
very plausible attempts (e.g. Ross [1924], i.256, Patzig [1960], 38) to ﬁnd in paronymy the basis of Aristotle's
doctrine of focal connexion; see 8n45.
Aristotle has nothing that quite corresponds to the use of the English indeﬁnite article; but his examples seem to
reﬂect our use of it quite well. Some qualiﬁcation, however, is needed. The claim that strong predication requires a
noun does not quite reﬂect Aristotle's view, since he mentions to ti leukon, with a neuter adjective, as a subject of
strong predication, 1a27. But since this is parallel to hê tis grammatikê, Aristotle probably means the adjective to be
(as often in Greek) interchangeable with an abstract noun—i.e. his point would equally well have been captured by
hê tis leukotês (cf. 10a30). He moves freely from neuter adjective to abstract noun in referring to qualities; at
10b12–17 to purrhon and to ôchron are said to be colours and called poia, and coloured subjects are called poia kata
them; this is the same relation that is said to hold between subjects and poiotêtes, 8b25, 10a27–9, where the poiotêtes
are referred to by abstract nouns. On 2a27–34 see n27.
At 3a36 Aristotle says no predication (or predicate: katêgoria) comes from ﬁrst substance. He does not offer
examples to illustrate the error of treating the ﬁrst substance as a predicate; but his illustration in 8a15–21 suggests
how he might argue. It shows that he insists on referring to the ﬁrst substance as ho tis anthrôpos etc., not by a
proper name.
Aristotle claims that ‘it is evident from what has been said’ in the deﬁnition of strong predication and inherence
and of ﬁrst and second substance, that a ﬁrst substance has the name and deﬁnition of its second substance, but
not of its inherent item, predicated of it, 2a19–34. The deﬁnition of man and animal are predicated of the
individual man, but the deﬁnition of whiteness is not. This is a consequence of the deﬁnition because inherence
underlies adjectival predications, those in which we introduce (e.g.) whiteness, but cannot say that Socrates is a
whiteness. On nouns and adjectives see Joseph [1906], 46.

NOTES

28.
29.

30.

31.

505

On name and deﬁnition see Ackrill, 82, 85. Ackrill is probably wrong in saying that Aristotle tells us to substitute
for the name (e.g. ‘boxer’) the deﬁnition of ‘the item it introduces’. Aristotle has no reason to deny that ‘the
individual man is a boxer’ introduces the item that is a boxer. He claims that this item is introduced only in so far as
boxing is inherent in the man. Hence he has to instruct us to substitute the deﬁnition of the inherent item
introduced. On Dancy's treatment of this passage see n29.
In 2a27–34 Aristotle mentions an exception. Here the ‘name’ is the adjective, and the case arises only when the
subject is neuter. This is not an exception to the point about nouns and adjectives in n14 above. Contrast the case
of differentiae, n46.
Perhaps Phys. 190b24–6 alludes to this point; see 4n31.
On sortal and characterizing universals see Strawson [1959], 168, Sellars [1957], 130–3. Strawson, like Aristotle,
recognizes particular instances of characterizing universals. He allows that ‘his anger cooled rapidly’ mentions a
‘particularized quality’, 168n. Cf. Wiggins [1980], 7 (referring to Aristotle on substance and quality). Ayers [1974]
rejects the claim that sortal properties determine identity as a ‘conceptualist’ as opposed to a ‘realist’ view. This
view that appeals to sortals involve conceptualism scarcely ﬁts Aristotle, who believes that correct judgments of
identity reﬂect the real kinds that things belong to, expressed in the correct sortal predicates. See further § 99.
Dancy [1975a], 350–2, suggests that in ‘Socrates is pale’ pale is said of Socrates. (He speaks as though Aristotle
used proper names such as ‘Socrates’ to refer to ﬁrst substances; but see n26.) But in 3a21–8 Aristotle remarks that
it is not special to second substances to be said of ﬁrst substances, and points out that differentiae are said of them
too. If he thinks ‘the individual man is pale’ is a strong predication, why does he conﬁne himself to differentiae?
The question ‘Poion?’ may seek two quite different sorts of answers: (1) The contrast between ti and poion is the
contrast between asking what something is and asking what it is like. See Plato, Meno 71b3–8, Eu. 11a6–b1 (on
ousia and pathos). (2) The contrast between tode ti and poion is the contrast between particular and universal. The
‘poion’ question asks us what sort of thing the subject is, and the answer tells us the kind or class or sort it belongs
to, not the particular thing it is. Hence it answers the ‘What is it?’ question. For this reason Socrates often
associates ‘ti esti?’ with ‘poion esti?’ (e.g. Ch. 159a3, 7, 10, 160d7, Pr. 312d5; in Meno 74c3 poion 〉 the differentia).
Aristotle seems to distinguish the two uses of ‘poion’, when he claims that second substances (a) signify a poion, a
such, not a this (Catg. 3b15, quoted, § 41); (b) do not signify a poion and nothing else (haplôs), as qualities do, but
signify a sort (poia) of substance (3b18–21); (c) say what ﬁrst substances are (2b29–34). The consistency of (a) and
(c) rests on (b).
Aristotle claims that qualities are multivocal, and that their common feature is only their being ‘that according to
which people are called such (poioi)’, 8b25–6). Second substances and differentiae seem to satisfy this rather

506

32.

33.
34.
35.

36.

NOTES

generous condition. Aristotle might reply that ‘poion’ is multivocal not just within the category of quality, but also
between quality and substance; but if he says this he needs to say what the qualitative poia share with each other
and not with the substantial poia. Since poioi seems to meet the conditions for homonymy in Top. 107b6–12,
Aristotle probably means (contrast Ackrill, 104) that qualities (within the category of quality) are homonymous.
Met. 1020a33–b25 perhaps suggests a helpful distinction between the two types of quality. (1) The differentia of
substance is a property that the subject must retain, the stable aspect of the substance. (2) The second type of
quality is the property that makes the subject capable of change. Since a subject is capable of change only if it is to
some degree stable, the second type of quality presupposes the ﬁrst.
Ross [1924], i.p. xci n4, assumes on the strength of this passage that the differentia of a substance is a quality, i.e. a
non-substance. But Aristotle does not say that the ﬁrst type of poion belongs to the category of quality.
It is especially obscure at Top. 178b37–9, 179a8–10, whether Aristotle intends poia to be qualities or universals
(‘suches’) or both.
Though time and change are not mentioned in the statement of the special property, the examples show that they
are intended; see esp. 4a5–17 (cf. 5b30–6a11, Top. 167a23–7 on contraries), 4b10–13.
Why might not some substances be subjects without being subjects of change? (See Stebbing [1929]; Kneale
[1939], 110, citing Hume and Russell.) Aristotle might appeal to the counting function of second-substance terms
for subjects across time, not only at a single time. If we have to say why this horse is a single subject, and this
horse's leg plus that horse's head is not, we might properly appeal to the role of this horse in change—change
happens to it, not to the arbitrary collection of parts of two horses. Aristotle has no general argument, then, to
show that every subject must persist through change; rather, judgments about what persists through change
provide some basis for judgments about what is a subject. See 11n3.
In using ‘what-it-is’ in a specialized way, as a name for the ﬁrst category, Top. 103b22, Aristotle suggests some
special connexion between this category and the ‘What is it?’ question. He sums up the general use of what-it-is:
‘For each of these 〈sc. substance etc.〉, if it is said about itself 〈e.g. ‘this man is a man’〉 or its genus is said
about it 〈e.g. ‘this man is an animal’〉, one signiﬁes what-it-is. But when 〈it is said〉 about something else, one
signiﬁes not what-it-is, but quantum or quale or one of the other categories’, 103b35–9.
Two assumptions made here reveal the special position of the ﬁrst category: (1) When Aristotle describes the
second case he does not include substance among the things we could mention without saying what something is.
(2) Aristotle perhaps assumes that ‘saying about something else’ is saying something about a substance, so that the
substance is the genuine bearer of non-substantial properties. If this is right, we will collect the non-substances by
collecting the non-substantial properties of substances. In this way the procedure in the Top. leads us back to the
procedure

NOTES

37.
38.

39.

40.
41.
42.

43.

44.

507

in the Catg., where Aristotle seems to be asking different questions about a substance.
Moravcsik [1967], 90f, rightly appeals to idia to show that the distinction between strong predication and inherence
cannot be the distinction between essential and accidental properties. The two distinctions are identiﬁed by
Trendelenburg [1846], 36. Further relevant distinctions are discussed by Copi [1954].
The proprium seems to be deﬁned both in non-modal terms (All and only Fs are Gs) and in modal terms
(Necessarily Fs are Gs and Gs are Fs), 102a18–24. However, the non-modal account cannot be adequate; for
128b34–6, 132a34–b3 reject propositions that belong to a subject because of its non-essential relations to other
things, 139a10–20. On propria see further Joseph [1906], 90f, 6n13.
The further conditions for propria are these: (1) The proprium must always be true of the subject, not true at one
time and false at another, 133a12–23. Aristotle wants to identify permanent features, not just distinguishing marks,
of the subject. (2) The statement of the proprium must mention the genus, but not the differentia, since otherwise
it will state the essence, 131b37–132a21. (3) The proprium must be described by reference to what is better known,
130b38–131a26. Hence we cannot mention the species in trying to state the proprium of the genus. By ‘better
known’ Aristotle must mean ‘better known by nature’; for otherwise he would not claim that the species is never
better known to us than the genus.
We must assume that quanta all have numerable properties making them numerable, if we are to agree with
Aristotle's claim that equality and inequality are the proprium of quanta, 6a26–35; cf. Met. 1004b10–12, Plato,
Parm. 140b7–8. But he does not say so in the Catg.
For sôma cf. Met. 1020a15, DC 268a1–11, 298b3. It is not clear if a particular mathematical sôma necessarily has the
size it has; if so, it will not be capable of growth or diminution, and so cannot be identical to the organic body that
is capable of these.
It is not even clear that the second deﬁnition is right to imply that being necessary is necessary for being noncoincidental. We cannot say that it is a proprium of men to have two legs, since some men are mutilated, and hence
it is possible for men not to have two legs, Top. 134a5–17, a26–b10. On this view it will (according to the second
deﬁnition) be coincidental to men to have two legs, whereas Aristotle believes it is intrinsic and natural, and hence
not purely coincidental.
He claims that the second deﬁnition is preferable because it is self-sufﬁcient, not requiring us to understand the
three properties being excluded in the ﬁrst deﬁnition. But this claim is true only if we can grasp the concept of
possibility more easily than we can grasp the concepts in the ﬁrst deﬁnition. Why should we assume that this is
true? (At any rate it is not because Aristotle takes being possible to be the same as being sometimes true; for he
allows that an argument is a proof of possibility, but not a proof of being sometimes, 113b6–14.)
For this reason two deﬁnitions of the same thing are not allowed, 141b22–142a2,

508

45.
46.

47.

48.
49.
50.

51.
52.

NOTES

139b22–140a2. Though two descriptions may be equally useful for informing different interlocutors, only one
deﬁnition can describe the real essence. Two deﬁnitions of the same thing are perhaps allowed at 128a4–12; but cf.
144a11–15, 151a32–b2, b15–17.
Aristotle's failure to mention form and matter in such a suitable context is a good reason for thinking he has not
yet formulated these concepts, or at least has not reﬂected enough about them to see how they apply to this
problem; see also 4n19.
Ackrill, 86, remarks that Aristotle uses differentia-terms that function naturally in Greek as nouns, citing Catg.
14b33–15a7. At DI 21a3 he uses the masculine dipous, in a context where he is raising a difﬁculty and deliberately
treating dipous as parallel to leukos. The neuter dipoun is used at 20b17, 34, 21a15, 17, where it is closely related to
zô(i)on. Aristotle certainly can say ‘The man is a white thing, leukon’; but he also freely uses the masculine adjective
here, and normally avoids it for the differentiaterm. Here is perhaps a further reason for doubt about Dancy's view
that mousikos is said of a ﬁrst substance; see n29 above.
Biped is not a proprium, since a proprium is a necessary property and it is possible for a man not to be a biped,
Top. 134a5–17, b5–7. If biped is a differentia, then at least some differentiae are natural but non-necessary
properties (but contrast 144a23–7). In predicating a differentia of a ﬁrst substance or species, we will be saying that
this man belongs to the naturally biped species, or that man is the naturally biped species of animal. On this view,
the property of being biped is merely inherent in the species; but predicating the differentia is still strong
predication, because it is really predicating the species.
On Phys. i 1 see 2n62.
On Top. 101b3–4 see § 18. On argument according to belief see 6n1.
Allan's clear statement, [1965], 9f, of a purely dialectical method, relying simply on common beliefs and ways of
speaking, underestimates the selective aspect of Aristotle's treatment of common beliefs. The difﬁculty of
explaining how the conclusions of dialectic can be objective principles is ignored in Wieland's account of ‘principles
as topoi’, [1970], 202. He argues from the claim that we search for principles by means of doxa to the conclusion
that the principles rest, in Aristotle's view, on nothing but doxa: ‘Alle Wissenschaft gründet so in etwas, was selbst
nicht der Wissenschaft zugänglich ist’, 221 (the context shows that he refers to doxa). This raises a difﬁculty for
Aristotle unless we deny that his archai are meant to be objective principles.
184b25–185a5 argues: (1) Nature is an origin of change, and the Eleatics abolish change. (2) Monism makes an
origin impossible altogether. (See Ross [1936].)
185a2–3 might refer to dialectic or to ﬁrst philosophy, as described in Met. iv. Phil. 27.9–18, Them. 3.20–2, Simp.
47.21–3, 49.6–11, do not decide between the alternatives. Alex. ap. Simp. 49.20–3 takes Aristotle to refer to ﬁrst
philosophy; and Ross agrees. A reference to dialectic is more probable, however (see Berti [1965], 43n93, opposed
by Leszl [1975], 339, 505), since Aristotle's approach is purely dialectical, following the methods described

NOTES

53.
54.

55.
56.
57.

58.

59.

509

in the Topics. In saying that his discussion ‘has some philosophy’, 185a20, he does not mean that it is more than
gymnastic. On philosophy see 7n14. On the prospects for a ‘common science’ see 7n19. He does not intend to
prove the truth of the belief in change, but thinks dialectical discussion of the Eleatic position will be useful
gymnastic exercise. He says the examination ‘has some philosophy’ in it, 185a20, but he does not mean that it is
more than gymnastic. On ﬁrst philosophy see 8n2.
See 185a5–12, Met. 1009a20–2, EN 1146a21–7, Top. 105a3–9, 159b30, viii 5.
Students of nature justiﬁably reject challenges to their principles and treat them as ‘assumptions’ (hupotheseis,
185a12; cf. EE 1218b37, 1219a28), for two reasons: (1) Students of nature, as such, actually deﬁne their task partly
by the principles they take for granted; cf. DC 298b11–20. (2) It is clear from induction that things change,
185a12–14; and if a truth is clear in itself, there is no need and no scope for a proof. see § 72. Only (2) explains
why Aristotle thinks it unreasonable to seek a proof at all.
Some of the limitations of Aristotelian dialectic are stressed by Solmsen [1968], 52–4. On the contrast with Plato
see 7n13.
see § 69 on the rejection of coherence, §§ 83–4 on proof of ﬁrst principles.
If the one being is substance, then, Aristotle assumes, it must also have non-substantial properties, and these are
further beings, even if they are not separated from substance. If, on the other hand, we say that the one being is
non-substantial, we talk nonsense; for non-substances depend on substance, and in this way also we ﬁnd that there
must be at least two beings, 185a26–32.
If things are one by being continuous or by forming a single whole, there can still be many of them, 185b5–19.
And if the Eleatics want to say that everything is one ‘in account’, as cape and cloak are, the result will be nonsense.
For then they will be committed to the Heracleitean view, as Aristotle describes it, that contrary properties are
really one and the same property; they will be making everything not one, but nothing, 185b19–25; all the
properties there are would make a self-contradictory property.
Aristotle now argues that even if ‘being’ has one signiﬁcation, it does not follow that there is one being; for if
‘white’ has a single signiﬁcation, there may still be many white things, 186a24–31. Parmenides must take ‘Being’ to
signify only the very subject that is wholly and exclusively being. If Parmenides is granted this conception of
signiﬁcation, his monist conclusions follow; for ‘being’ will be inapplicable to anything except this one subject,
186a32–b14.
If Parmenides' being is the only being it cannot be deﬁned, since the deﬁning properties would have to be further
beings, 186b14–33; and in general it can have no other properties except that of being wholly and exclusively being.
Aristotle could raise a further question: how can it be without being something or other, and how can it be
anything without being something other than being? The Eleatic being seems to turn out to be a non-being. But
though this further objection is a natural corollary of Aristotle's previous points, he does not raise it.
see § 74.

510

NOTES

60. See §§ 94–5.
61. On logos, 188a31, contrasted with aisthêsis see 2n9. Charlton [1970], 66, claims: ‘This is not an empirical doctrine to
the effect that the universe is regular; it is the purely logical doctrine that change is within deﬁnite ranges.’ But
Aristotle does not mean (as Charlton's view would imply) that if not-F is followed by F and the succession is not
suitably related to a succession of contraries, that is not properly a change; he means that there are no such
successions. Bostock [1982], 186, also seems to me to exaggerate (though he adds some appropriate qualiﬁcations)
the ‘conceptual’ character of Aristotle's argument.
62. This passage is not mentioned in Sorabji [1980], 51–4, in his survey of evidence for determinist assumptions in
Aristotle, or in Hintikka [1977], 38. Waterlow, however, mentions it, [1982], 6, and takes it to imply rejection of
random processes.
63. The contraries involved in becoming and perishing are referred to both by neuter adjectives (to mousikon etc.,
188a36) and by abstract nouns (anharmostia, 188b14). Charlton reasonably remarks, [1970], 68, that Aristotle treats
the contraries as properties, not things. However, he also seems to refer to the compound of a subject with a
contrary; this is the hêrmosmenon in 188b12.
64. Aristotle might insist that only those unmusical things that are also capable of becoming musical are suitable
termini of a change resulting in something's being musical; the demand for contraries and intermediates will then
be simply a symptom of the demand for reference to the appropriate potentialities. But though potentiality and
actuality are prominent in later books of the Phys. (and cf. 191b27, 193a31–b8), he omits them here. He simply
appeals to common sense, citing ordinary ways of speaking about contraries and intermediates. Some of the
difﬁculties Aristotle causes by his appeal to contraries are skilfully exposed by Bostock [1982], 190f.
65. Aristotle argues: (1) It is hard to see how either of the contraries acts on the other, 189a20–7. (2) We never see the
contraries being the substance of anything, and the origin must be said of no subject, since otherwise the subject of
which it is said will be the origin of the origin; for the subject is the origin, and seems to be prior to the thing
predicated, 189a27–32. (3) Since we do not allow substances to be contrary to each other, we cannot allow them to
be constituted by contraries, since that would make non-substances prior to substances, 189a32–4.
These arguments will move us only if we agree that substances are not contrary to each other. But in Catg. 3b24–32
Aristotle merely points out that a favoured example of substance, e.g. man, has no contrary, and generalizes the
claim to substances in general. (In the GC he allows that the four simple bodies are contraries, 331a1–3, but only in
so far as they have contrary affections; they are not contraries in themselves, 335a3–6.) He continues to rely on this
hasty generalization.

NOTES

511

Chapter 4
1. If we answer ‘What is this man?’ by ‘He's a son’, we invite the further question ‘Whose son?’; and if we answer
‘How big is this man?’ with ‘He's tall’, we invite the question ‘Tall in relation to what?’ or ‘Taller than what?’.
Aristotle implies that if our initial answer invites a further question relating the object of our initial inquiry to
something else, then we were wrong in thinking we had identiﬁed a substance, quantity, etc., and we have really
identiﬁed a relative.
2. Aristotle's revised test for relatives claims that if we deﬁnitely know some relative, we deﬁnitely know what it is
related to; heads and hands fail this test, but doubles and halves do not, 8b3–21.
This revised criterion deserves two comments: (1) It does not seem obvious that to know that A is a slave I must
know that he is B's slave, or that to know that A is a father I must know that he is B's father. Any questions about
whether I ‘deﬁnitely know’ in these cases seem equally relevant to a head or a hand. (2) Aristotle assumes that (a)
parts of bodies are substances, and (b) no substance is a relative. If it is better to revise the criterion for a relative
than to give up either (a) or (b), the class of relatives cannot be determined by the initial grammatical tests that
embodied the ﬁrst criterion. But Aristotle offers us no other way to determine the class of relatives; and hence we
do not know what the ﬁrst and second criteria are meant to be criteria for. The revised criterion is justly criticized
by Ackrill [1963], 102f.
Perhaps he could argue that what makes something a hand is something about its internal structure and
organization, not about its relation to something else, even though the internal structure and organization make it
capable of being related in the appropriate way to something else. This argument conﬂicts with the view that hands
essentially depend on belonging to living organisms, so that dead hands are merely homonymous, Met. 1035b23,
DA 412b20. But Aristotle may not hold that view in the Catg., where he thinks that hands etc. are substances,
contrary to Met. 1040b5–16.
3. On the problem about descriptions see White [1972]. In claiming that being a man is a coincident of being a
master, 7a25–b14, Aristotle need not, and should not, mean that it is not necessary for being a master; but if he
allows a necessary property to be a coincident, he violates one of the deﬁnitions of coincident offered in the Topics.
4. This claim applies to non-compounded things; see 3n6.
5. If 6b2ff is taken with 11a20ff, it seems most plausible to take the ‘of ’ belonging to states as specifying the states,
rather than saying who their owners are (as in ‘state of Callias’ etc.). The second view seems to apply, undesirably,
to qualities and quantities no less than to relatives.
6. Elsewhere Aristotle claims that relatives are secondary in the appropriate way; a relative is merely an appendage
and coincident of being, EN 1096a21–2, and inferior even to other non-substances, Met. 1088a21–9. A substance
must have a relative property by having some non-relative

512

7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

12.

NOTES

property; a father must have begotten, a child must have been born, a double must have a quantity, and so on. A
subject has its relative properties by having the non-relative inherent properties it has, and it has these by being the
subject and the substance it is. The ‘by’ relations here must be asymmetrical, and must reﬂect some ontological
hierarchy, independent of the choice of one or another description. The discussion of relatives in the Catg. never
suggests that they have this inferior ontological status; for the Catg. lacks the resources to argue for the appropriate
claims about priority.
In DI 21a14 I follow the OCT in reading ouk estai to leukon mousikon. In the light of ‘if it is true to say that the white
is musical’, a12, we must take a14 to mean that it is not the white, but the subject that is coincidentally white, that is
the proper subject of the coincident of musicality; see 6n11.
On paronymy see 3n24.
The apparent fact that ‘both the word hulê and the notion for which it stands are entirely absent from the Organon’
(Ross [1949], 639) might be explained by (a) the absence of the concept from Aristotle's early thought, or (b) its
irrelevance to the purely logical concerns of the Org., or (c) its inappropriateness in the Org. for some other reason.
Ross, Bonitz [1853], 608, defend (b). Moravcsik [1967] 90, Dancy [1978], 373ff, defend (a). Furth [1978], 629–32,
defends part of (c), by reference to the deliberately introductory character of the Catg.; but he does not discuss the
general question about the Org.
I am convinced by (a). The Catg. could easily have introduced matter, and it would quite often be relevant, e.g. at
4a10–13 (see also the examples in the text, and 3n45. (I agree with Ross and Dancy, against Waitz [1844], ii.402,
Barnes [1975], 216, Balme [1972], 83, that APo 94a21 does not show that Aristotle has the concept of the material
cause.)
On questions about matter and numerical unity see § 138.
Armstrong [1978], i.111–13, imposes stricter requirements on a believer in universals. In his view, the universal is
one and the same in all its instances, in a sense of ‘one and the same’ that is not captured by the sense in which a
scattered particular is one and the same (see 3n20); he wants ‘one and the same’ to imply that the whole universal is
present in each of its instances. I think the unity of a scattered object is very close to the sort of unity that Aristotle
ascribes to universals.
Nominalist (in the sense I have indicated) views of Aristotle's doctrine in the Catg. are defended by Sachs [1948]
(answered by Mure [1949]), Jones [1975], 167. (Jones distinguishes ‘class’ and ‘property’ interpretations, but argues
only against universals conceived as classes.) Hartman [1977], 17, says: ‘When one talks of species and genera, in a
ﬁrst order way, what one says can be translated into talk of their members, according to Aristotle. Therefore
nothing he says in the Catg. commits him to species or genera distinct from their members.’ His second sentence
does not follow from the ﬁrst. For the ‘class’ interpretation see Lloyd [1966], 259f.
The use of ‘signify’ in 3b10 should not mislead us (as it misleads Jones [1975], 165, and Ackrill, 88) into supposing
that Aristotle ought to be

NOTES

13.
14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

513

talking about names rather than extra-linguistic items. Signiﬁers include extra-linguistic items too. See Irwin [1982],
254.
The same claim that universals are beings but not thises supports Aristotle's account of a Platonic error. He thinks
we avoid the error if we recognize that man and every ‘common thing’ (koinon; i.e. universal) signiﬁes a such rather
than a this, Top. 178b36–9; cf. 168a26, 169a30–6. See 3n30 on thises and suches.
When he says that what is imperishable is found among universals, APo 85b15–18, he must refer to a subset of
universals, including those for species of organisms, whose everlasting existence is secured by the laws of nature.
On everlasting species see 5n25.
To support actual instantiation a deﬁnition of universal need only say ‘is actually predicated of at least one thing
and possibly predicated of many’; but this is not a possible interpretation of Aristotle's deﬁnition. Either the
remark about instantiation conﬂicts with the deﬁnition (taken to require only possible instantiation) or the
deﬁnition requires actual plural instantiation.
According to Armstrong's conception of universals, [1978], i.64f, 113, every universal must be instantiated at least
once at some time. His view is therefore intermediate between the Platonic belief in uninstantiated universals
(compared and contrasted with Aristotle's view by Fine [1984]) and the probably Aristotelian belief in necessary
plural instantiation; see § 143.
Aristotle might be speaking loosely; perhaps he really means that a universal is not a this because, unlike a this, it
can have plural instances, and if that is all he means he might still think universals are properties. That is not his
usual construal of the requirements for not being one in number; all his other examples are spatially dispersed.
Moreover, since we have already seen some evidence for taking him to require plural instantiation, there is no
reason to make special efforts to avoid attributing the same requirement to him here. See 12n46.
Other types of priority listed in Catg. 12 (temporal, 14a26; value, 14b3) do not seem promising ways to explain the
priority of ﬁrst substances.
‘Natural priority’ is not used in ch. 12 for asymmetrical dependence. It is used this way at Met. 1019a2 (on 1028a33
see 10n8; cf. 6n18). The same relation is referred to without this name at 1077b2–3, Phys. 208b33–209a2,
260b17–19, EE 1217b11, 1218a4; and ‘natural priority’ is used to refer to different relations, e.g. at PA 646a26 (cf.
‘priority in being’, GA 742a22), and perhaps EN 1096a21 (see Ross [1924], i.317, ii.160f). (Owen's account of
logical priority at [1960], 186, is over-simpliﬁed. The EE passages that he takes to discuss natural priority do
indeed concern asymmetrical dependence; but they do not use the phrase ‘prior by nature’ at all.)
To show that there can be no ﬁrst substances with nothing said of or in them, Aristotle needs at least to exclude
the possibility of bare subjects. See 3nn57–8, 9n12. To show that there must be a ﬁrst substance as the basis of a
series of predications he needs to argue against the possibility of an inﬁnite series of predications, each involving a
subject that is predicated of a further subject. He argues against this possibility in APo 83b17–31.

514

NOTES

20. Aristotle argues that since animal is predicated of man it is predicated of the individual man; for if it were
predicated of none of the individual men it would not be predicated of man at all, 2a36–b1. Aristotle cannot take
predication to imply dependence (contrast Ackrill [1963], 83, whose suggested principle makes a genus depend on
each one of its species). For animal is not dependent on man—it would exist if there were other species of animal,
but no human species; for the same reason it cannot depend on an individual man either. Aristotle might also claim
that if F is said of any F it depends on the existence of some F or other. See 3n21. This further claim would imply
that animal depends on some animal and man on some man, without implying that animal depends on some man.
But Aristotle never states, much less defends, this further claim. See further Harter [1975], 19.
21. Ackrill, 83, remarks that 2a5–6 assign no special status to substances if they are not independent of other beings.
Duerlinger [1970], 199–201, and Dancy [1975a], 346, deny that Aristotle means to claim independence, but do not
answer Ackrill's point. Moravcsik [1967], 95, Hartman [1977], 14, assume rather too quickly that Aristotle is
committed to the asymmetrical existential dependence of other beings on ﬁrst substances. The problem of mutual
dependence is sharply raised by Grote [1872], i. 119. On the priority of substance see Stough [1972].
22. Aristotle might reply that a ﬁrst substance is either a ‘moderately bare’ particular (if it must instantiate some
universal or other, but there is no one universal that it must instantiate), or an ‘extremely bare’ particular (if it can
exist without any universals at all). But he probably does not allow extremely bare particulars. If he thinks a ﬁrst
substance is moderately bare, two difﬁculties arise: (1) Moderate bareness does not establish the independence of
ﬁrst substances from all universals. (2) Aristotle should say what makes a given moderately bare particular the
same thing when it has ceased to be (e.g.) a man, and what would make it the same thing if it exchanged each of its
properties for another. In fact he never suggests that the ﬁrst substance that is an individual man can ever be
anything else.
Furth [1978], 628–31, points out that the Catg. does not explicitly deny the possibility of moderately bare
particulars (i.e. those for which no one property, but some property or other, is necessary). But Aristotle plainly has
the concepts of proprium and coincident in the Catg., and he can hardly relate them to ‘What is it?’ without taking
the latter question (as in the Top.) to be answered by an account of the essence, which is a necessary property
(implied by the second deﬁnition of coincident in Top. 102b6). This essentialism is consistent with the
independence of ﬁrst substances from second (contrast Furth, 631), if the existence of one specimen does not
imply the existence of the species.
23. We might try a different sort of explanation. A ﬁrst substance, we might say, already includes all it needs; it already
has a substantial property, and by being what it is it includes non-substance particulars. It does not depend on
anything not already included in it. A particular non-substance, on the other hand, requires something external to
it, the existence of a ﬁrst

NOTES

515

substance; and a universal requires something external to it, the existence of a plurality of instances. (Ross [1924], i.
p.xci, explains the priority of ﬁrst substance by reference to completeness. See also Grote [1872], i.136.) But if
externality is explained by reference to existential independence, it does not yield existential independence for
substances. It might be understood by appeal to deﬁnitional or explanatory priority; see 10n7, § 145. Aristotle's
unclarity about subjecthood and independence is pointed out by Kneale [1939], 105.
24. In 190a6–7 we might translate ek mê mousikou mousikos by ‘musical comes to be from not musical’, with mousikos as
subject and (the understood) gignetai taken absolutely. (So Charlton [1970]. Ross [1936], 492, implies this view, but
does not imply it in his summary, 345. The OT is ambiguous.) The absolute use, however, is explicitly introduced
only at 190a31–3, and 190a6, tode gignesthai (after the example in a4–5), suggests that qualiﬁed becoming is at issue.
We therefore have good reason to take gignetai predicatively, as ‘from being unmusical man becomes musical’. (So
ROT. This explains the masculine mousikos.) The same translation works in the rest of the discussion up to a31–3.
25. What is the exact referent of to amouson and such phrases? (Cf. n7, 6n9, 10n5, 45.) (1) The referent does not persist,
190a10–13. (2) Hence the phrase should not mean ‘the man (etc.) who is coincidentally unmusical’, since he does
persist. The unmusical might therefore be (3) the subject that is essentially unmusical, or (4) the instance of the
property. Both (3) and (4) satisfy (1), and they seem equally plausible. Code [1976], 180f, and Matthews [1982],
225, endorse (3) without considering (4). See also Williams [1985].
In 190a17 Aristotle says ou gar tauton to anthrôpô(i) kai to amousô(i) einai, and if amousô(i) is neuter, he claims that to amouson
is numerically one with the man. If, however, amousô(i) is masculine, he may mean that the man and ho amousos (i.e.
the man who is coincidentally unmusical) are one in number, but not the same in form. This does not imply the
parallel claim about to amouson. On difference in being see 13n21. On property-instances see 3n21.
26. Charlton [1970], 76f, denies that the matter persists in cases of substantial becoming, appealing to the seed, which
is the matter of the plant or animal, 190b4–5, but does not persist in the product. Jones's defence of this view,
[1974], 476, is answered by Code [1976a]. Aristotle seems to believe (i) that the organism comes to be from the
seed, (ii) that the seed is the matter, (iii) that the organism comes to be from the matter, (iv) that the seed does not
persist, and (v) that the matter persists, 192a31–2, 193a10 (enhuparchein). But these need not conﬂict. For (ii) may
apply to the seed as a stage of the continuous thing that is the matter of the organism, and in that case (iv) is no
objection to (iii) and (v). On Met. ix 7 see § 126.
27. In the GC Aristotle argues that unqualiﬁed becomings are not really just qualiﬁed becomings: (1) Unqualiﬁed
becoming is not by combination and dissolution but ‘whenever it changes from this to this as a whole’, 317a20–2;

516

NOTES

some new whole must come into being. (2) When the whole changes, nothing perceptible remaining as the same
subject, there is unqualiﬁed becoming, 319b14–16.
These answers are open to objections: (a) Can we tell if (1) is satisﬁed without deciding if a new substance has
come to be? If not, we seem to rely on the views we are trying to understand. (b) Joachim [1922], pp. xxxiii, 107,
suggests that the demand for a perceptible subject is really a demand for a substance composed of form and
matter—though the evidence he cites is not compelling (see also Jones [1974], 499n, Williams [1982], 216f). If he is
right, then (2) seems to be open to the same objection as (1). (c) Why should qualiﬁed becoming require the
persistence of a perceptible subject? Why should a persistent subject of any sort not imply that the process is
merely a non-substantial change? (d) The bronze seems to persist when the statue comes to be; and the bronze is
apparently a perceptible subject. Hence (2) seems to make the process a qualiﬁed becoming. (e) Might there,
however, still be a change from whole to whole? We seem to be forced back to (1).
Both the GC and the Physics fail in the same way, by assuming that we can identify substances or subjects or wholes
without further argument.
28. 190b9, b25, mention matter casually as though it is understood. 191a7–12 explains ‘subject nature’ (or ‘underlying
nature’, hupokeimenê phusis) by analogy; and one of the examples in the analogy may mention matter. (Some editors,
perhaps rightly, suggest the deletion of hê hulê kai in 191a10; but 190b9, 25 weaken their case.) 192a5 speaks of
matter without further explanation. 192a31 identiﬁes it with the ﬁrst subject. Bostock [1982], 187, argues
unnecessarily for an ambiguity in hupokeimenon.
Aristotle seems to take his use of ‘matter’ to be neither perfectly familiar nor a purely technical use requiring
explicit deﬁnition. Presumably he appeals to its use for ‘raw material’ (e.g. Plato, Phil. 54c2). See Solmsen, [1961],
who contrasts (410) hulê with xulon (but 193a9–12 counts against such a contrast).
29. ‘Said of ’ relies on kat' allou legesthai hupokeimenou, 190a35. I take this to cover both strong predication and inherence,
as they are conceived in the Catg.; and I assume (see § 39) that it also implies that no compound of a subject and an
inherent item (e.g. a musician) can be a substance.
30. I agree with those who believe that in the GC (esp. 332a3–18, 334a15–25, b2–7; see Williams [1982], 214f, Sheldon
Cohen [1984], 174f) Aristotle recognizes prime matter, the basic matter that underlies the four elements and the
most elementary qualities. See Charlton [1970], 129–45, and [1983], King [1956] (against prime matter), Solmsen
[1958], Robinson [1974], Williams [1982], 211–19, Sheldon Cohen [1984] (in defence of prime matter). I do not,
however, believe that Aristotle is committed to prime matter in all the passages where some defenders claims to
ﬁnd it. On Met. vii 3 see 10n27.
We may doubt if prime matter is really a plausible, or even coherently describable, subject. It must have the
capacity to acquire the different

NOTES

31.

32.
33.
34.

517

elementary qualities, but has none of these qualities essentially. It is pure capacity, because its capacity is not further
explained by any actual qualities it has; here it violates our normal way of understanding how a subject has the
capacities it has. (Sheldon Cohen [1984], 178–81, defends prime matter against the charge of incoherence, but I
doubt if he adequately answers the charge about capacity.) If, then, prime matter is the result of applying the
common-sense conception of substance, and prime matter is so dubiously coherent, something seems to be badly
wrong with the common-sense conception. But even if prime matter is coherently conceivable, it still makes
difﬁculties; Aristotle's initial candidates for substance will turn out not to be substances at all.
In i 6 he seemed to take it for granted that a substance would be a subject, 189a27–33; and he has not explained
why being a basic subject is not sufﬁcient for being a substance. Admittedly, he contrasts matter with ‘substance,
this and being’, 191a11–12, and says that matter is ‘not one or a being in the way that a this is’, 191a13. But he has
not explained what is wrong with matter; see Bostock [1982], 195. He does not deny that the piece of bronze that
is the matter of the statue is a single piece, and therefore numerically one, and therefore a this; cf. 190b24–6.
See also Catg. 1b6, 3a35–b7, where atomon is applied to substances and non-substances alike. It is applied to
particulars in contrast to their eidos at Top. 121a35–9, 122b20–2, 144b1–3, and to the species (since it is not further
divisible into species) at 109b13–23, Phys. 227b7, 30.
Top. 135a20–b6 discusses sea and air as examples of homoeomerous things, without reference to any questions of
numerical unity, and with none of the biological examples Aristotle uses elsewhere. On homoeomerous parts see
Metr. 389b23–8, GC 314a18–20, 321b16–19, 328a10–12.
The suggestion that atomon (‘undivided’ or ‘indivisible’) refers to the sort of indivisibility that homoeomerous things
lack faces a difﬁculty. For non-substance particulars are also thises, and therefore atoma; for this particular white, e.
g., seems to be divisible into particular whites (i.e. patches of white), and large or equal things may also be divisible.
We might reply that Socrates' white is not divisible into two Socrates' whites; but in the same way this pint of water
is not divisible into two pints of water. It is not easy to say what conception of indivisibility Aristotle might
reasonably intend. A piece of bronze seems to satisfy the condition for being atomon suggested by Simp., in Catg.
51.14–15, of having nothing more partial (or ‘less general’, merikôteron) than itself of which it is predicated as of a
subject.

Chapter 5
1. Aristotle seems to accept this inconsistent set: (1) Form and matter are origins of change. (2) The origin of change
is the same as the efﬁcient cause. (3) Therefore form and matter are efﬁcient causes. (4) The formal and

518

NOTES

material causes are not efﬁcient causes. (5) Therefore form and matter are not efﬁcient causes. (6) Therefore they
are not origins of change. To defend (1) he must reject (2) or (4) or both.
2. Alexander, De Fato 3, presents the four causes as coordinate causes of the same thing, a statue. While such an
account is suggested by Phys. 195a5–8, it may still be signiﬁcant that, as Sharples [1983], 127 remarks, Aristotle
himself offers no such example. His own examples illustrate the difference between the different why-questions in
a way that suggests that the causes are not coordinate in exactly the way that Alexander's exposition implies. This
point is suggested without argument by Sprague [1968], 299. See also Todd [1976].
3. Annas [1982], 321n, mentions these as examples of things cited ‘elliptically’ as aitiai. I agree with her against
Moravcsik [1975], 629, who regards such examples as constituting an objection to our attributing a concept of an
efﬁcient cause to Aristotle. But Annas surprisingly claims that Aristotle ‘does not envisage that a statement might
truly pick out a causal relation, but in a quite unexplanatory way’, 320. The elliptical examples she cites seem to
illustrate the sort of thing she thinks Aristotle does not envisage; still clearer examples are provided by coincidental
causation, which she does not discuss; see § 56 below.
4. My account of Aristotle's view implies that the traditional label, ‘the four causes’, is largely justiﬁed. (a) It is not
always clear what is meant by claiming that the four aitiai are really explanations, since it is not always clear what a
critic takes the relata of an explanation to be. Sometimes it is assumed that the relata are propositions, or at least
that the explanans is; we can then distinguish explanation rather sharply from causation, if we think causation
relates events. Hocutt [1974], 388, seems to claim both that (1) a demonstrative syllogism states the aitia, and that
(2) it is the aitia; and he gives no argument for passing from (1) to (2). (This objection is raised by Mure [1975],
356.) Aristotle does not treat either of the terms related by an aitia as a proposition; see Moravcsik [1974], 6f,
Charles [1984], 44–7. (b) If explanations relate events or substances (or other items that are not propositions), then
aitiai are explanations; but this may actually imply (if we take the relevant kind of explanation to be a causal
explanation) that they are causes. (c) If an explanation is true and adequate only relative to a given questioner's
interests and puzzles, then we could ﬁnd a true explanation without ﬁnding the cause (if the questioner is puzzled
about the wrong things, or not puzzled about all the right things). See Sorabji [1980], 29. But there is no reason to
suppose that Aristotle attributes such relativity to judgments about aitiai. (d) Aristotle's examples do not all look
like what we would call causes; only the efﬁcient cause (which Aristotle calls the origin of motion) looks like a
cause. See Annas [1982], 319. Moravcsik [1974], 9, perhaps goes further than Annas in denying that the archê
kinêseôs is a cause; he denies that it is a ‘mechanical’ cause, but does not explain exactly what that is. If our account
is right, the efﬁcient cause is central in a way that encourages us to think he is speaking about causes. The other
causes are no more rivals to the efﬁcient cause than ‘The captain caused the

NOTES

5.

6.
7.

8.

519

ship to sink’ is a rival to ‘The incompetence of the captain caused the ship to sink’. (e) It is true that unchanging as
well as changing things may have an Aristotelian aitia. If we ask for the aitia of a triangle's having angles adding up
to 180 degrees or of a syllogistic conclusion (cf. 194b27–8, 195a18–19), there is no change, and no efﬁcient cause,
but there are still formal and material aitiai. (Moravcsik [1974], 3, mentions this as a reason for denying that the
four aitiai are causes.) But it does not follow that Aristotle is not looking for causation when he investigates the aitia
of a change. See Fine [1987], 70–6, Sauvé [1987], ch. 2 (two different views, but with similar conclusions on this
particular issue).
‘Most exact’ renders akrotaton, 195b22, literally ‘most extreme’. Aristotle does not say that the akrotaton cause will
be the energoun mentioned in b16–20. But the descriptions of the two seems to imply this. On akrotaton Ross rightly
refers to Met. 1044b1. Phil. 258.16–22, Simp. 326.15–30, Them. 47.2–7 explain akrotaton by kuriôtaton kai
prosechestaton, saying why the cause (i.e. the substance with the relevant actualized capacity) is the cause (by referring
to the actualized capacity). Simp. 326.15–16 identiﬁes the akrotaton cause with the Stoic sunhektikon cause. They
suggest that this is the prôton aition, because any further asking of the question ‘Why?’ is euêthes; Simp. 326.19–20
uses this point to explain akrotaton (which he therefore must understand as something like ‘highest’).
On non-propositional ﬁrst principles see § 1.
In 193a31–b18 Aristotle offers three arguments to show that form is nature. (a) 193a31–b8; we do not say
something has reached the completion of the craft until it has acquired the form of a bed; so also we should not
say that something has reached its nature until it has reached its form. Aristotle needs to convince us that these
ways of speaking of artifacts reﬂect causally relevant features, and then that the same features justify similar ways of
speaking about organisms. (b) 193b8–12; man comes to be from man. But equally a musical man comes to be
from a white man (if the unmusical man was white); Aristotle has himself pointed out that in ‘the F comes to be
from the G’, ‘G’ may be a purely coincidental description of the origin, 191a33–b10. (c) 193b12–18; becoming is a
way towards nature; the nature towards which it is a way is form; hence nature is form. Organisms certainly come
to have a form; but such a weak sense of ‘is a way towards’ is not enough to show that form is nature. Aristotle
needs the stronger claim that growth is to be explained by reference to form, that things grow in order to achieve
their form. This teleological sequence is implied in 193b13–16; but he needs to show that the same sort of
sequence is found in organisms.
At 190b19–22, 28–9 form or shape is identiﬁed with the quality instantiated as a result of a change; see also
191a8–12, 15–20, 192a20–1, a34–b2. At 193a31 Aristotle probably does not intend every quality acquired in a
change to count as a form; but he has not explained how he distinguishes genuine forms from mere qualities.
In GC 322a2 wet and dry are taken as examples of form, and form is connected with affections, pathê, 316b2–5.
Form is connected with a this

520

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

NOTES

and a positive quality as opposed to a privation, 319b14–18. Like ‘this’ (see 10n12), ‘form’ is used in the GC for the
category of substance, but not conﬁned to it.
In Aristotle's discussion of growth, form cannot be simply shape or quality, since growth involves change in these,
whereas the form remains the same, 321b28–34, 322a29–33. (The distinction is not so clear when, e.g., the form
of wine is being discussed, 328a27–8.) Indeed form is what grows and is nourished, 321b16–28; for it is not every
part of the matter that increases, but the form, 321b32–5. Aristotle compares form (1) to a measure that remains
the same but measures successive quantities of water, 321b24–8; (2) to a pipe or tube or vessel that grows as new
matter is added and ﬂows through it, 322a28–33. Though (2) is better than (1) (since a tube, unlike a measure, can
grow while remaining the same tube), it is still not quite right; a tube is constituted of additional matter besides the
matter that ﬂows through it, whereas the form is not, and the nature of the tube does not explain the changes in
the matter in the way the form is supposed to explain the process of growth.
If growth is a teleologically ordered process, the formal and ﬁnal cause has the sort of efﬁcient-causal relevance
that is needed for a genuine cause; this connexion between form and growth is clear in DA 416a9–18 (see n23),
but not in the GC. Aristotle identiﬁes the form and essence with the ﬁnal cause, 335b5–7, but this view does not
completely control his account of growth. He attributes growth to a ﬁre, 322a10–16, which is not teleological.
Joachim [1922], 134, reads in too much from DA 416a9–18 (see Williams [1982], 111).
Early in Phys. ii 1 substance is identiﬁed with subject, 192b33–4. But 193a9–10, 20 refer to the substance of
something, i.e. substance as essence, apparently identiﬁed with the nature of that thing. 193a23–6, contrasting
substance with affections, could refer to substance as subject or as essence. The discussion of substance, form and
matter in Book i, by contrast, has no example of ‘substance’ referring to the substance of something.
198b16–23 concedes that the rain falls not for the sake of anything, but simply ex anankês. We might take this to be
merely a temporary concession, so that Aristotle still might think rain falls for the sake of something (though not to
make the crops grow). See Cooper [1982], 217n; but on his argument from 198b36–199a5 see n18 below. On local
and global teleology in Aristotle see Eucken [1872], 81–7.
In 196b34 I would prefer to read komizomenos or komisomenos (i.e. referring to X who has come now to sell his
olives, but would have come now to collect the subscription Y owes him if he had known Y would be here now),
rather than Ross's komizomenou (which would have to refer to Y, the debtor). In 196b35–6 I retain tou komisasthai
heneka, and explain it: ‘it was a matter of coincidence that X came to the market just now and did this now (i.e. got
the money off Y) to collect what Y owed him’. If we explain 35–6 in this way, then we must apparently take the
occurrence of some form of komizesthai in 35 to refer to X also.
This account of lucky events supports Torstrik's suggestion, [1875], 445, that we should read prachthê(i) rather than
prachtheiê in 196b22. Them. 51.1,

NOTES

14.
15.

16.

17.

521

ginetai, perhaps supports Torstrik. In any case, the better attested reading gives too weak a condition for
something's being heneka tou, and we can easily explain how lucky events (said to be heneka tou in 196b30, 197a6)
meet the stronger condition of actually being done from thought. The optative phrase occurs in 197a35, hos' an
genoito heneka tou. But it does not support the optative in 196b22; for in the later passage Aristotle is referring to
both lucky and chance, automaton, events, and chance events need not in fact happen for the sake of something. As
Aristotle says, chance events are included en tois haplôs heneka tou gignomenois, 197b18–19 (i.e. they are events, e.g.
escaping danger, of the type that are done for the sake of something). They are not caused by anyone's decision,
and are not done for the sake of the end that they in fact promote (197b11–22). They have the wrong sort of
efﬁcient cause to be really for the sake of the good result that they actually promote. They have a non-ﬁnal cause
that coincidentally produces the beneﬁcial result. The difference between luck and chance casts doubt on
Simplicius' explanation of 196b22, at 335.20–6. Unlike Aristotle, he refers the remark to both luck and chance, and
imposes too weak a condition on luck. He rejects Eudemus' and Porphyry's correct (as far as I can see) explanation
of heneka tou applied to luck, on the ground that it is too restrictive to apply to chance, 336.20–30 (but then seems
to imply that it is correct, in 30–3). He is right to say that it is too restrictive to apply to chance, but this is not a
ground for rejecting it, since Aristotle does not apply it to chance.
It is not clear what X's actual purpose was; probably Aristotle means, as when he ﬁrst introduces the example, that
X came to the market to sell his goods, 196a3–5.
196b24–36 suggests that Aristotle thinks the same event has both an intrinsic and a coincidental cause—e.g. that
the same event is both (a) X's being in the market at the time he intended, to sell his olives, and (b) X's being in the
market when his debtor Y is there. Because (a) is true of the event, X's decision to go to sell his olives is its intrinsic
cause; because (b) is true of it, X's decision is its coincidental cause. Though the lucky event, as such, has only a
coincidental cause, the event itself also has an intrinsic cause. Aristotle shows no sign of denying that every event
has an intrinsic cause. He shows how he might defend the determinist assumption of Book i (see 3n62) against
objections based on belief in the existence of lucky and coincidental events. His treatment of these casts doubt on
the claim (defended in Sorabji [1980], ch. 1) that in Met. vi 3 he afﬁrms some form of indeterminism.
We will want to state Aristotle's position differently if we attribute to him different views about the individuation of
events; see n33 below.
The end or goal of an event is not the same as the efﬁcient cause. In intentional action the end is not the decision,
EN 1139a31–2, but the result aimed at in the decision; but since the result is part of the content of the decision,
1139b3–4, reference to it explains something about the nature of the efﬁcient cause. Though the end is not the
efﬁcient cause, it must be relevant to and explanatory of the efﬁcient cause.
If ‘as they do’ (houtô, 198b35) means just (a) ‘the same way’, then Aristotle

522

NOTES

simply appeals to uniformity. But the way that is relevant here is (b) uniform apparent teleology, ‘as if they were
coming about for the sake of something’, 198b29–30. Since this point is not in dispute with Empedocles, Aristotle
can fairly take it for granted. See n18.
I use ‘uniformly’ and ‘frequently’ for the purely statistical notions that might seem to be conveyed by aiei and hôs epi
to polu. I use ‘always’ and ‘usually’ as translations of Aristotle's terms—and so not as having a purely statistical
sense (since I do not think this is always the sense of Aristotle's terms).
18. In 198b36–199a5 Aristotle might seem to argue: (1) Whatever happens always or usually (e.g. rain in winter, heat in
summer) is not accidental. (2) Whatever is not accidental is teleological. (3) Hence what happens always or usually
is teleological. (4) Hence rain in winter etc. is teleological, Phil. 315.14–16. This argument will secure Aristotle's
conclusion against Empedocles, but it relies on the highly controversial premiss (2). Admittedly (2) might seem less
controversial if Aristotle illegitimately equivocates on two senses of ‘accident’, (i) not always or usual, (ii) not for
some purpose; the Atomists, e.g., might agree that the present order of the world is non-accidental in sense (i),
because it is necessary, but accidental in sense (ii) because it is non-teleological (cf. 196a24–196b5).
However, we can take the argument differently, taking (2) to refer only to apparently teleological things (as in
198b35; see n17). Rain making the crops grow does not count as apparently teleological, since it no more makes
the crops grow than it spoils the crops on the threshing-ﬂoor. For apparent teleology the beneﬁt must not suffer
from these obvious counterexamples. (Contrast Furley's argument, [1985], 180.) If this is right, the tauta in 199a4
will be the same tauta as in 198b34, i.e. apparently teleological things, and (1) will be a parenthesis, giving examples
that are not intended to be within the scope of (3).
Charlton [1970], 123, takes tauta this way (but still criticizes Aristotle as though (2) were involved). Furley's
argument against Charlton assumes that the always and usual cases in 198b36–199a3 cannot be non-teleological
without damage to Aristotle's argument. But we need not accept Furley's assumption. The examples illustrate what
is always or usual; and when we have a case of this plus regular beneﬁt, we have a case of ﬁnal causation. On always
and usual see n20.
Cooper [1982], 216f, argues that Aristotle accepts (2), without any support from an equivocation, 208n, and that
he simply assumes teleology is the only plausible explanation of uniform apparent teleology. Such an inference is
dubious if (as Cooper agrees) a teleological claim implies the sort of efﬁcient-causal claim described in the account
of chance above. If we take tauta in 199a4 so that it does not commit Aristotle to (4), we need not assume that he
makes the dubious inference supporting (2). We might none the less have to agree with Cooper, if we can ﬁnd no
more plausible account of what Aristotle might be taking for granted.
If we deny that Aristotle's argument assumes that rainfall has a ﬁnal cause, we need not also deny that he believes
rainfall has a ﬁnal cause; the

NOTES

19.

20.

21.

22.

523

ﬁnal causes he considers are not the most plausible candidates (cf. Them. 60.9–14, Simpl. 374.18–28). The issue is
only whether this particular argument assumes or implies that rainfall has a ﬁnal cause.
In 196b36–197a1 and 197a3–5 the addition of toutou heneka, 197a4, suggests that a causal connexion is assumed,
not merely inferred from the fact of uniformity. Perhaps X and Y both want to catch a bus at 9.00, and so are
always or usually at the bus stop at 9.00; but it is still a coincidence that each of them is there at the same time as
the other is (i.e. this property of the event is coincidental). Though Aristotle does not discuss this possibility, he has
no ground for rejecting it.
In his discussion of luck Aristotle uses ‘usually’ to indicate a causal, lawlike connexion, not a mere uniformity; and
this is a frequent, though not the only, use of ‘usually’. It often refers to what happens ‘by nature’, where this
indicates a teleological connexion, not mere statistical frequency. See GA 727b29–30, 777a19–21, Eucken [1872],
88, Régis [1935], 93–105 (who connects it, wrongly, with the denial of determinism), Barnes [1975], 184.
Moreover, Aristotle pairs ‘usually’ with ‘always’, which, in this context, he takes to be interchangeable with
‘necessarily’; see also Phys. 196b12–13, Met. 1025a15, 1026b30, APr 32b5–6. On the usual and the necessary see
Mignucci [1981].
Some have claimed that Aristotle takes mere uniformity to be sufﬁcient for necessity. (See Hintikka [1973], 96,
taking omnitemporality to be equivalent to necessity.) But APo 73a28–b28 sharply distinguishes mere uniformity,
kata pantos, from the katholou, which must be kath'hauto; and being katholou is necessary for being anankaion,
73b25–8 (cf. 96b1–3). (See further § 63.) Since uniformity is not sufﬁcient for necessity, and Aristotle treats
‘always’ as interchangeable with ‘necessary’, he is unlikely to believe that mere uniformity implies ‘always’. The
passages that Barnes [1977] regards as the best evidence of Aristotle's reducing the necessary to the omnitemporal
are Met. 1026b27–37, 1088b23–5, GC 337b35–338a3, DC 281b20–5, Phys. 203b20. But they are evidence for this
only if ‘always’ has a purely temporal sense.
If this is true about ‘always’, we should not assume that mere uniformity implies ‘usually’.
‘Always’ and ‘usually’ must share the asymmetry of the causal relation, rather than the non-symmetry of the
relation between things that are uniformly or frequently associated. (1) B uniformly follows A, and (2) whenever B,
then A, imply (3) A uniformly follows B. But the implication does not hold if Aristotle's ‘always’ or ‘usually’ is
substituted for ‘uniformly’.
In ﬁnal causation without intentional action we can still say that the putative goal of a process is the real goal if the
properties of the goal explain some aspect of the efﬁcient causation of the process. This condition is met if the
theory of evolution is true of natural organisms, since the beneﬁt secured by a particular trait (itself the result of a
process with no ﬁnal cause) explains why the trait persists in later generations. Wright [1973], 61, and [1976], esp.
80–6, presents an account of teleological explanation with this

524

NOTES

causal element. Wright's account is criticized by Boorse [1976], and Cummins [1975], esp. 749–57. I am not
convinced that these criticisms undermine Wright's type of analysis (though they may show that it is incomplete;
see Cummins 752n); and in so far as they raise objections to the efﬁcient-causal aspects of an account of
teleological explanation, they seem to raise objections to Aristotle's account also. See also G. A. Cohen [1978],
ch. 9, Meikle [1985], 166–71, Sorabji [1980], ch. 10, Gotthelf [1976], Woodﬁeld [1976].
23. See also § 158.
24. If this view is right, then 198b34, ‘it is impossible for it to be this way’, does not refer to Empedoclean natural
history, but to the conclusion of the argument (logos, b33) that beneﬁcial teeth etc. are purely coincidental. The
argument fails, because the teeth example implies the presence of an always-or-usual causal connexion that is not
implied in the rainfall example.
25. To see that Aristotle's teleological claims are compatible with more than one, but not with all, of the logically
possible empirical accounts, it is useful to compare his account and Empedocles' account with Darwin's, which
combines elements of both their accounts in ways contemplated by neither of them. (See also Sorabji [1980], ch.
11, and esp. G. A. Cohen [1978], 270–2, on teleology and evolutionary theory.) (1) He agrees with Empedocles in
regarding the appearance of the ﬁrst creatures with beneﬁcial teeth as a random change. The beneﬁt of teeth does
not explain why these creatures have them. (2) But he agrees with Aristotle's view that the beneﬁt of teeth explains
why later generations have them; heredity and natural selection make the beneﬁt of teeth causally relevant. The
Darwinian theory, therefore, like the Aristotelian, makes teleological explanations turn out to be true.
Darwin's account, then, is one logically possible empirical account of how Aristotle's teleological claim might be
right. It could not be Aristotle's account; for he does not believe that there ever was a creature for which beneﬁcial
teeth were coincidental. He can appeal to some extent to heredity, since that will eliminate the deviant specimens
that violate the usual teleological rules. But he does not suppose that the observance of teleological rules could be
the result of processes that were originally matters of chance. He assumes ﬁxity of species, and therefore does not
allow random mutations (which he does allow) to have the far-reaching effects contemplated by Darwin. See GA
731b31–732a1, 760a35–b1. GC 338b11–19, DA 415a25–b7 stop short of asserting the actual permanence of
species; Balme [1972], 97f, and Clark [1975], 35f, raise doubts about Aristotle's general commitment to the thesis.
Lennox [1985], 90f, denies that Aristotle is committed to the ﬁxity of species and the everlasting continuation of
their members. He denies that species-forms are everlasting, 88, by relying on evidence that seems to me to prove
the point only for particular forms; see 11n22.
A Darwinian account explains the causal relevance of beneﬁt without assuming that organisms have been designed
for their beneﬁt. An account

NOTES

525

of intelligent creation appeals directly to design as the basis of teleological regularities. Aristotle's position is
different from both of these; for him the universe was never created, and hence nothing explains how organisms
originally came to be teleologically ordered, since they never came to be this way. He must express in different
terms his belief that organisms have always had their teleological structure non-coincidentally. He needs to say that
if the structure they have did not beneﬁt them, they would not have had it and the universe would to this extent be
different from how it actually is. The crucial claim, then, for the truth of Aristotle's teleological thesis is the claim
about causal relevance; and while this has empirical implications, it does not imply the truth of Aristotle's particular
empirical account.
The possibility of teleological explanations without belief in evolution or design is raised as an objection to Wright's
causal account of teleology (see n22 above) by Boorse [1976], 74f. I do not see that this objection gives sufﬁcient
reason for denying a causal element in teleology; I am not sure how a non-causal account deals with beneﬁcial
coincidences (see Wright [1973], 165). In some cases, admittedly, a mechanism may have come into being by
accident (not even by Darwinian evolution) and yet be explicable teleologically; but in this case the beneﬁt resulting
from it explains its remaining in being rather than its coming into being, and the explanation will still be causal
(satisfying the sorts of counterfactuals suggested for Aristotle's account). This conception of functional explanation
is considered and rejected by Cummins [1975], 749–51.
26. The other arguments for teleology in ii 8 appeal in various ways to analogies between craft and nature, explored in
199a8–32. We might construe these as purely dialectical arguments, pointing out that we tend to think of natural
processes in some of the terms we apply to crafts, and therefore tend to apply teleological notions to them. But
these arguments are useless for proving that natural processes are really teleological unless we accept the crucial
claim about the causal relevance of the goal. When Aristotle claims that technical and natural processes work in the
same way, 199a9–15, he does not mean that if ships grew naturally, the keel and the skeleton would grow ﬁrst. He
means that in both cases the growth and the ﬁnal state of the object is to be explained teleologically—it grows that
way and is that way because that is its function. To understand the ‘because’ here we must say something about the
type of efﬁcient causation involved. In production by a craft we can see that the right type of efﬁcient cause is
present. In natural processes the question is harder; to answer it Aristotle must appeal to the arguments against
Empedocles. The success of the later arguments, if they are to be anything more than purely dialectical, depends on
a claim about causal relevance.
27. This view is present in Dennett [1971].
28. The view that teleological claims involve no efﬁcient-causal claims at all, is held by Von Wright [1971], 83–6,
Nussbaum [1978], 88. I believe (without certainty) that it is fair to attribute this view to Wieland [1975], since he
claims that. ‘telos is a concept of reﬂection . . . not a universal cosmic or

526

29.

30.
31.

32.

NOTES

metaphysical principle’ (146). He does not clearly distinguish the question of whether Aristotle is committed to the
view that the universe as a whole has a teleological structure from the question of whether he is committed to some
metaphysical or ontological claim—e.g. to the presence of the right sort of efﬁcient cause.
The view that a teleological explanation conﬂicts with a non-teleological explanation of the same process is held
(for purposive behaviour) by Taylor [1964] 40–8, clariﬁed by [1966]. In [1970], he seems to withdraw from the
claim about conﬂict, and to claim instead (quite reasonably) that the same property of a process or event cannot
have both types of explanation (see, e.g., 73f (related to his [1967]) and 89–92). This would be a version of the
third view of teleology. (Taylor's conception of the individuation of processes and events, and his claims about
basic explanations, leave me a bit unsure about his position.) Taylor's earlier view is effectively criticized by Block
[1971].
Gotthelf [1976] defends the irreducibility of teleological explanations and the dunameis they essentially refer to. But
he also accepts Taylor's earlier belief in incompatibility, without distinguishing this from irreducibility (as Taylor
does in his later work). He is rightly criticized by Miller [1984], 142. Incompatibility is also accepted by Balme
[1972], 76–80, Cooper [1982], 210n (where he distinguishes his view from Balme's). Sorabji [1980], chs. 9–10
criticizes this view.
Waterlow [1982], 80–9, argues that for Aristotle the prospect envisaged by his materialist opponents would be
empirically so implausible as to be not worth taking seriously. Waterlow describes Aristotle's position in such
extreme terms that it is hard to see why Aristotle should offer the material explanations of goal-directed processes
that he actually offers. Waterlow's argument, however, does not imply that Aristotle regards teleological
explanations as incompatible with non-teleological explanations of the same events (she does not state a view on
this issue).
The third view results from attributing to Aristotle a view similar to the one developed by Wright; see n22 above.
To avoid this argument some believers in the second view about teleology (e.g. Taylor, in his ﬁrst view; see n29)
have denied that explanations referring to intention and purpose are efﬁcient-causal explanations. The argument
for this denial are not very good; and they would in any case require considerable revision to Aristotle, since he
does not entertain any of the necessary doubts about the efﬁcient-causal character of these explanations.
In speaking of unconditional, haplôs, necessity in contrast to conditional necessity in teleological contexts, we mean
that this necessity is not limited by any teleological condition, not that it is from every point of view unconditional.
The necessity of the movement of the heavens is, in Aristotle's view, absolutely unconditional, but the necessity of
a particular sublunary contingent material process is conditional, since it depends on the occurrence of the process
that is its efﬁcient cause, and this is not absolutely unconditionally necessary. The contrast drawn in GC ii 11 does
not conﬂict with the one drawn in Phys. ii 9.

NOTES

527

33. We may deny that a goal-directed process is the same event as the material processes underlying it, even if we agree
that they are necessary and sufﬁcient for it. Such a view, requiring two events to have the same essence if they are
to be identical, is attributed to Aristotle by Charles [1984], 30–4. I am inclined to think that Aristotle individuates
events in such a way that the goal-directed process and its material basis will be the same event (cf. the treatment of
lucky events, n15 above). A narrower construal of event identity requires Aristotle to say that teleologically
explained events are not identical to non-teleologically explained events, but the latter sort of event is necessary and
sufﬁcient for the former. Similar reformulation will be required if we construe ‘explanation’ differently from the
way I have suggested in n4 above.
34. Other examples make the same point about the possibility of double explanation. (1) Man has the hairiest head
among the animals, both because of an unconditional necessity and for some goal, PA 658b2–10. (2) An animal's
horns have a function, because nature uses their necessary nature (cf. Phys. 200a8–9) to achieve a good result, PA
663b12–664a8. The necessities mentioned here are unconditional, e.g. the tendency of some matter to move
upwards, 663b34; nature uses them for the protection of the animal. To support this claim Aristotle argues that the
beneﬁt resulting from horns helps to explain why animals have them (or lack them, 664a3–8). (3) The squid's
secretion of dark ﬂuid is necessitated as the discharge of urine is in other animals, but nature uses this necessary
effect for the creature's beneﬁt, 679a25–30. In each of these cases the explanatory relevance of the beneﬁt still
allows a non-teleological explanation of the same event.
35. The most helpful discussion of conditional and unconditional necessity is Cooper [1985], esp. 158–61. He argues
that unconditional necessity operates at stages within larger natural material processes that are themselves only
conditionally necessary. For these larger processes, then, Cooper still apparently takes teleology to be incompatible
with unconditional necessity, on the ground that Aristotle thinks, e.g., that the end product is not explained by the
matter, 161. But this does not show that the process identical to the emergence of the end-product cannot be
explained non-teleologically. If Cooper allows the compatibility of teleological explanations and unconditional
necessity for smaller processes, why not for larger processes too?
36. Le Blond [1939], 29, notices the absence of reference to causation in the dialectical account of essence in the Topics.
See also 6n12.
37. Waterlow [1982], 90f, rejects some of Gotthelf's emphasis on the empirical character of Aristotle's theory. I agree
with her conclusion, though not with her argument. She argues that Aristotle's conception of nature leaves ‘no
conceptual room for a view of basic physical units whose character is shown in and through all their speciﬁc
combinations’, 91. Even if Waterlow were clearly right about this, it would show only that Aristotle must reject one
type of non-teleological law; it would not show that he could not regard any types of non-teleological laws as
empirically possible.

528

NOTES

Chapter 6
1. For ‘according to belief ’ and ‘according to truth’ see Top. 100a27–b23, 105b30–1, 155b7–16, 162b31–3 (cf.
165b1–4), APr 43a39, b8–9, 46a3–10, 65a35–7, APo 81b18–23 (cf. 72a9–11). On dialectic versus demonstration
see Top. 162a12–18, APr 24a22–5.
2. see § 35.
3. The account of science in the APo does not describe a method for discovering scientiﬁc truths from experience.
See Barnes [1969]. The demonstrative structure is intended to display the epistemological and metaphysical
conditions for a science. (Contrast Barnes's view, 77–87 (discussed by Burnyeat [1981], 115–20), that the
demonstrative structure is simply an expository or didactic device.) Though Aristotle need not believe that the
standards of science have been attained yet, he must give us reason to think they are attainable, if he is not to
frustrate his own aims for inquiry.
Some have suggested that passages in Aristotle's other works actually display the demonstrative form that he
expects in a completed science. See Allan [1961], Jope [1972], Barnes [1981]. While there is some reason to see
deductive structure, there is no sign that Aristotle intends the ﬁrst principles to have the status he assigns to ﬁrst
principles of demonstration. See 7n10.
4. On nominalism and realism about universals see 4n11, § 144. According to Barnes [1975], 139, Aristotle means
that demonstrative science requires true universal propositions rather than subsistent universals, and any apparent
commitment to the reality of universals is a result of failure to ‘put the matter cleanly’. There is no reason to
attribute any such nominalist intention to Aristotle (least of all in 77a5–9); and the nominalist claim itself is
disputable. Statements about universals cannot be reduced to statements about classes of particulars, unless we
speak of predicating properties of particulars; and in predicating properties (and not simply applying names) we
commit ourselves to the existence of universals. Armstrong [1983], 77–85, presents this argument brieﬂy.
5. These arguments do not distinguish Aristotelian universals from non-particular properties. See §§ 43, 143.
6. In 85b23–5, kath'hauto in the gar-clause explaining katholou indicates that here also the katholou is kath'hauto.
7. On the demand for necessity see Sorabji [1981], 233–44. He seems to me to under-emphasize Aristotle's
explanation of necessity by reference to essential and intrinsic properties. Kosman [1973], 377, appropriately
stresses the connexion of necessity with explanation. On necessity see also Barnes [1975], 97; Burnyeat [1981],
108–10.
Hintikka [1972] (discussed by Frede [1974], with a reply by Hintikka [1974]) claims; ‘One is almost tempted to say
that Aristotle's views on ﬁrst principles of a science are predictable on the basis of his syllogistic theory’ 55. But
Hintikka's prediction fails to deal with the demands for necessity and for explanatory connexion. (The relation to
syllogism would be even

NOTES

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

529

less close if Barnes [1981] were right to say that Aristotle's theory of demonstration is earlier than his theory of the
syllogism.)
My remarks indicate that I am inclined to believe (a) that the necessity Aristotle has in mind is primarily the (de re)
necessity of necessary properties rather than the (de dicto) necessity of necessary truths (on this distinction see
Kneale [1962], who describes it with some scepticism, and Sorabji [1980], 186–91; its formulation for Aristotle
requires us also to take account of his use of ‘qua’); and (b) that he explains necessity through essence rather than
the other way round (though his concept of the necessary as what cannot be otherwise clearly does not mention
essence). Doubts on these points are expressed by Lloyd [1981a], 163. On genuine subjects see § 39.
‘White thing’ translates to leukon, i.e. ‘the white’, the neuter deﬁnite article plus the neuter adjective. Sometimes
these adjectival phrases refer to properties, e.g. to inherent items in Catg. 1a27, 10b16, 27, 11a7; see 4n25. Here, as
in DI 21a20, they must refer to the subject; it is not the quality white that is a log. On these phrases see further
10n45.
‘Essentially’ renders hoper, 83a7. ‘x is hoper y’ means ‘x is exactly y’, i.e. the sort of thing whose essence is y. This
assumes that it means the same as ‘y is touto hoper x is', as in Catg. 3b36, 6a39, 11a25, b26, Top. 141a35, Met. 1021a28
(retaining auto ho estin, against OCT and Ross's note). These examples are appositely cited in IA 533b59.
I follow Barnes in reading outh’ 〈hoper〉 leukon on in 83a7; cf. hoper xulon, a14, and hoper ekeino, a27.
Two tests pick out the genuine subject: (1) If ‘The G is H’ is true, but the F is G coincidentally and is H, then the F
is the subject of the G and the H. (2) If the F is G by being F, then the F is the subject of the G. In Aristotle's
example, nothing is a log by being white, but logs have the coincident of being white by being logs, and hence the
log is the genuine subject of whiteness, while the white thing is not the genuine subject of being a log. The
sentences that have combinations as their apparent subjects are equivalent to sentences that reveal the genuine
subject more clearly, Met. 1017a7–22.
The explanatory aspects of essential properties are well discussed by Kung [1977], 370f. See 5n36. On deﬁnition
see Bolton [1976], Ackrill [1981]. On essence see 3n39, Kirwan [1970].
The properties that are explained by the essential properties are the ‘intrinsic coincidents’, kath'hauta sumbebêkota
deﬁned in Met. 1025a30–4 (cf. 3n38). See APo 75a18, b1, 76b13, 83b19–20, Barnes [1975], 115. Inwood [1979],
323, infers from 85b23–7 that kath'hauta sumbebêkota are self-explanatory. But Aristotle says only that the subject
(hô(i) huparchei) of the intrinsic coincident is itself the aition for itself, 85b24–5, which I would take to mean that the
essence of the subject explains the inherence of the coincident (see Barnes [1975], 177), rather than that the
coincident explains itself. Intrinsic coincidents are discussed further by Barnes [1970], 139f, Wedin [1973], Graham
[1975], Hadgopoulos [1976], Granger [1981], Tiles [1983].

530
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.
23.

24.

NOTES

On homonymy see 3nn9–10.
On substance and explanatory properties see § 118.
On references in the Top. to demonstrative science see Barnes [1981], 48–50.
On truth and correspondence see § 2.
The passage is quoted and discussed at § 2. ‘Natural priority’ refers not only to asymmetrical existential
dependence, but also to precedence in different natural orders in different contexts; cf. 4n18, 10n8, Catg. 14b4–5,
Phys. 261a13–14, 265a22–4, PA 646a25–b2, Ross [1924], ii. 160.
Some issues about the asymmetry of explanation are discussed by Van Fraassen [1980], Brody [1972].
On priority in knowledge see Met. 1018b30–7, Barnes [1975], 100.
Aristotle is entitled to treat necessity as transitive, if he construes it as the normal purely modal operator. But in the
APo it is not clear that he has explained it this way. What belongs necessarily to something must belong to it in
itself, kath'hauto (see n6 above), and ‘in itself ’ introduces a reference to essence that may challenge the transitivity of
necessity.
see § 106.
In 72b13–15 Aristotle claims that for his opponent demonstration ‘from an assumption’ will count as a
demonstration, and this criterion makes demonstration absurdly easy, since ‘If p1, then p1’ is a demonstration
from an assumption. The opponent, however, claims at most to argue ‘Since p1, then p1’, not merely to argue
from the assumption that p1 is true. Hence his condition is not as trivially satisﬁed as Aristotle suggests.
Aristotle's claim that epistasthai requires an explanation has encouraged some readers to suppose that epistêmê is
really understanding (which is supposedly connected especially with explanation) rather than knowledge (which is
especially connected with justiﬁcation). Hence Barnes renders epistêmê by ‘understanding’, and Burnyeat [1981],
102–15, defends this rendering. I think it is a mistake, however, to suppose that Aristotle is not also concerned
with conditions for justiﬁcation, and therefore a mistake to suppose that he is not concerned with knowledge;
providing an explanation is a reasonable way of showing that a belief is justiﬁed. Though Burnyeat appeals to APo i
2 to show that explanation ﬁts better than knowledge, 110, he does not discuss i 3 fully. But the types of
demonstration rejected in i 3 allegedly violate general conditions for knowledge, not merely for demonstration; and
Aristotle sometimes says that the puzzles are general puzzles about knowledge. See 72b11–15, eidenai and agnôstous,
26–7, gnôrimôterôn; 30, eidenai. The three possibilities—inﬁnite regress, circle, and self-evident foundations—are
three ways of answering a question about justiﬁcation. See Chisholm [1982], 129–36. Armstrong [1973], 150–161,
traces the three possibilities, which he plausibly supposes to be possible accounts of knowledge, to Plato, Tht.
200d–201c; see 7n27.
Even if Aristotle is concerned only with a regress of explanation, he must show why explanations should not form
an inﬁnite regress or a circle; and he will have to appeal to those very claims about priority and independence in
knowledge that support claims about justiﬁcation. Even if the issues

NOTES

25.

26.

27.
28.

531

about justiﬁcation and about explanation are distinct, they do not seem to be independent in this case.
Foundationalism: see Chisholm [1982], 9–15. Aristotle cannot claim merely (as some foundationalists do) that
some beliefs have some degree of justiﬁcation independent of inference. Epistemic asymmetry demands basic
beliefs that are actually matters of knowledge or have equivalent epistemic status (the disjunction makes room for
nous) without any appeal to inference.
Scientiﬁc knowledge, epistêmê, requires demonstration; but Aristotle's conditions for demonstration preclude
demonstration of the initial propositions, the ﬁrst principles; either, then, there is no scientiﬁc knowledge of the
principles, or not all scientiﬁc knowledge is demonstrative. Aristotle speaks in both ways; see 72b18–25, 88b35–7,
100b5–17, Barnes, 108f.
See also Phys. 185a12–14, 252a32–b6, GC 325a13–23, § 16.
On begging the question see 9n14.

Chapter 7
1. The importance of epistemic asymmetry in Aristotle's view of ﬁrst principles is not accommodated in Wieland's
account [1970] 62–7, [1960], 135 (discussed by Hess [1970], 48–51).
2. On nous of ﬁrst principles see also EN 1140b31–1141a8, 1143a35–b3. GA 742b30–3 and Met. 1011a11–13 (see §
106) do not say that the basis of demonstration must be nous.
3. Nous is the capacity for conceptual thought and reasoning that is involved in the grasp of universals and the use of
universal concepts. see § 169. It is also needed to form the different perceptual judgments about this or that F into
the universal judgment about Fs as a whole (68b27–9, 88a14–17. horan . . . noêsai). It is not clear whether the nous is
part of induction or the state we have reached when we have ﬁnished the induction. Probably Aristotle has both
roles in mind, since the same sorts of abilities will be required at both stages. But these functions of nous do not
explain Aristotle's epistemological claims for it. Lesher [1973] shows that nous has a legitimate role in the formation
of generalizations and the acquisition of ﬁrst principles, and that this role does not require intuition of the
principles as self-evident. (See also Engberg-Pederson [1979], 307–10.) But we could agree with this, and still argue
that the epistemic status Aristotle assigns to ﬁrst principles of demonstrative science requires him to understand
nous as non-inferential awareness of something as true and necessary and better-known than its consequences.
Lesher's argument, 65, therefore fails to undermine a ‘traditional’ interpretation (accepted by, e.g., Sidgwick; see n9
below). A similar objection applies to Kahn's account in [1981]. Though Kahn thinks it is wrong to understand
nous as ‘an infallible intuition of self-evident truths’, 386, his account does not suggest an alternative way of
explaining the epistemic status assigned to nous.

532

4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

NOTES

Kosman comments, [1973], 388f: ‘understanding these principles as principles is just seeing them in their capacity to
effect this consistency and coherence in regard to phenomena, their capacity to make the phenomena intelligible. It
is, in other words, seeing them in their capacity to explain.’ Such an appeal to explanatory coherence is completely
reasonable, but it is not obvious how it will meet Aristotle's demands for epistemic priority. Kosman does not
explain how it avoids circularity of the sort Aristotle rejects (brieﬂy mentioned, 381). For further discussion of nous
and ﬁrst principles see Lee [1935] (the parallel with geometry that he suggests, even if it is correct, does not fully
explain the epistemic status that Aristotle claims for ﬁrst principles).
Aristotle sometimes seems to be discussing the acquisition of propositions that are ﬁrst principles, and sometimes
the formation of universal concepts. (See Barnes, 249, 254–6, 259f.) Probably he intends the account of concepts
to answer the question about principles. See Kahn [1981], 394–7.
In treating perception as an elementary cognitive state contributing to the formation of concepts, but not itself
involving them, Aristotle seems to ignore the conceptual character of some perception and appearance. see § 166.
He makes a parallel mistake in assuming that we begin by perceiving Fs, and then perform the induction that is
necessary for any universal judgment about Fs. see § 15. He ignores the fact that if we perceive things as Fs, we
must have the concept of F, and surely must already make some universal judgments about Fs.
Aristotle's genetic account of the growth of universal principles does not justify his claims about nous. When we
grasp a universal conclusion that Fs are Gs, we may also (if we have not yet accepted Aristotle's doctrine of
justiﬁcation) want to support the universal conclusion by appeal to our perceptual judgment that this F is G, that F
is G, and so on. In that case we do not halt the regress of justiﬁcation; to show that this must be halted Aristotle
needs to add further epistemological doctrines to his genetic account.
Nous is sometimes rendered by ‘intuition’, which is too specialized to be a good translation. (Barnes, 257, rejects
‘intuition’, on the mistaken assumption that such a translation would imply that nous was a means of acquiring
knowledge.) The wide scope of nous demands something like ‘understanding’ (Barnes uses ‘comprehension’). But
this point of translation leaves us free to argue that when Aristotle mentions nous of the ﬁrst principles of
demonstration, he must have in mind some intuitive awareness of them (see Sidgwick and Descartes, quoted
below, n9 and n17); and such an argument is cogent.
Le Blond's surprise [1939], 137 that nous is not mentioned in the account of acquisition of principles assumes that it
should be part of the process, rather than necessary for the product to count as a grasp of the principle. For similar
reasons Viano [1958] assumes that nous cancels the constructive role of dialectic. The distinction is clearly drawn by
Grote [1872], ii.293: ‘By referring the principia to Intellect (nous), he does not intend to indicate their generating
source, but their evidentiary value and dignity when generated and matured.’

NOTES

533

9. This role for dialectical argument is clearly stated by Sidgwick [1879], 106: ‘To ﬁnd a way out of this difﬁculty we
require, I think, to take Aristotle's distinction between logical or natural priority in cognition and priority in the
knowledge of any particular mind. We are thus enabled to see that a proposition may be self-evident, i.e. may be
properly cognisable without being viewed in connexion with any other propositions; though in order that its truth
may be apparent to some particular mind, there is still required some rational process connecting it with
propositions previously accepted by that mind.’ In Sidgwick's example I begin with a limited statement, come to
see that the limitation is unjustiﬁed, and so come to regard the unlimited generalization as self-evident. But even if
we initially regarded the limited statement as a matter of intuition (i.e. we sought no further grounds for it), it is
hard to see why we should say the same about the unlimited generalization; why do the reasons for rejecting the
limitations not also constitute inferential grounds for accepting the unlimited generalization?
Ross [1924], i.251f, suggests a similar role for dialectical argument about ﬁrst principles: ‘ . . . the statement of the
assumptions is preceded or accompanied by some sort of argument which is not meant to be cogent deduction
(that works only from principles to their conclusions), but to bring home to the learner's mind propositions which
in time he will see to be self-evident though at ﬁrst he may doubt or deny them.’ This account works quite well for
Aristotle's remarks on his approach to the Eleatics in Phys. i; see § 35. De Pater [1965], 83–5, takes a similar view of
dialectic in both Plato and Aristotle: ‘ . . . si selon Aristote la dialectique remplit une fonction à l’égard des
principes, ce n'est qu'en tant qu'elle mène jusqu'au seuil de la découverture des principes', 85.
10. On the differences between empirical inquiry and dialectic see § 24. The claim in Top. 101b3–4 (see § 18) that
dialectic has a road towards ﬁrst principles does not imply that it is more than ancillary to empirical inquiry. APr
46a28–30 refers to the work on dialectic for a discussion of the selection of premisses; it does not imply that
dialectical inquiry alone is adequate for ﬁnding ﬁrst principles. Owen [1961], 244, and Evans [1977], 32f, go too far
in connecting this passage with, as Owen puts it, ‘the claim made in the Topics that the ﬁrst principles of scientiﬁc
argument can be established by methods which start from the endoxa’. Owen refers to Top. 101a36–b4; but
Aristotle's claims there and in the APr fall short of the one Owen ascribes to him.
If Aristotle clearly relied on dialectically established ﬁrst principles for further demonstration, he would clearly be
committed to the strong claim about dialectic. On the possible role of demonstration see Jope [1972]. But Jope
does not show that Aristotle thinks the premisses of his deductions have the appropriate status to ground
demonstration, strictly so called. Jope fairly cites, 279n, the use of apodeiknunai at 233a7, b14, 237a35, 238a32, b16,
26, 240b8; but these passages do not show how strictly Aristotle intends the claim.
11. Since special disciplines do not fully answer the demand to ‘give an account’ that must be answered in a justiﬁed
claim to knowledge, Rep. 534b3–d1, they do not count as complete knowledge, 533c3–e2. The practitioners of

534

NOTES

these disciplines (e.g. mathematics) suppose they have found genuine ﬁrst principles when in fact they treat their
basic propositions as mere assumptions, hupotheseis; they simply assume their truth and construct a deductive
system from them, without seeking any further justiﬁcation for them, 510c1–d3. The dialectician looks for ﬁrst
principles that will justify them, 510b4–9, 511b3–c2. His activity is ‘destroying the assumptions’, 533c8; but he
does not undermine the propositions themselves, only their status as mere assumptions.
12. Dialectic will present the metaphysical basis of the special disciplines; it will show that mathematicians and
moralists must be talking about Forms, not about sensible particulars or properties; and Tim. 27d5–30c1 suggests
that the teleological structure of nature is explained as the product of intelligent design that is guided by awareness
of the Forms.
13. Aristotelian and Platonic dialectic are somewhat misleadingly contrasted by Solmsen [1968], 66 (who wrongly
denies that in Plato's theory dialectic begins from endoxa), and by Wieland [1970], 221 (who speaks of ‘Diese neue
Dignität der Doxa’, in Aristotle, as opposed to Plato, whose philosophy ‘gipfelt in dem, wovon man nicht mehr
reden kann’, 222). In my view, the essential difference is not in the starting-point or use of dialectical argument, but
in the evaluation of its conclusions. See also Viano [1958], Aubenque [1966], 277.
14. Aristotle's disagreement with Plato over dialectic explains a further disagreement about who deserves to be called a
philosopher. Both of them regard the philosopher as the seeker of knowledge and truth rather than mere belief,
Rep. 480a6–13.
Minimally, Aristotle ﬁnds philosophy in the disinterested study of puzzles apart from any immediate practical need
to resolve them, Top. 163b4–16, 175a5; Pol. 1279b11–15, 1282b14–23, 1299a28–30; and this is the sense in which
the gymnastic dialectic of the Physics ‘has’ some philosophy; see 3n52. He also identiﬁes it with the serious and
disinterested pursuit of the truth, EE 1216b35–9, PA 645a3, DC 291b24–8; hence the philosopher argues
according to truth, whereas the dialectician argues according to belief (see 6n1). Hence the ‘philosophical sciences’
are demonstrative, Top. 101a27, 163b9–though the term is not used in the Analytics, it refers to the sciences
described there. Demonstrative scientists deserve the name of philosopher because, in Aristotle's view, they fulﬁl
the reasonable aspects of Plato's aspirations for the philosopher in Rep. vi–vii. For Plato, the philosophers know
the permanent realities opposed to transient sensibles; they have knowledge and not mere belief; they can give an
explanatory account stating the cause. Aristotle's demonstrative scientist is the one who satisﬁes these Platonic
conditions.
Plato, however, also claims that philosophers will be universal scientists and that their method will be dialectical.
These two further claims are connected because dialectic is the universal science that understands and justiﬁes the
ﬁrst principles of the other sciences. Aristotle entirely rejects these two further Platonic claims, since he denies the
possibility of any universal science, and the claim of dialectic to give scientiﬁc knowledge.

NOTES

535

The only science is the demonstrative, departmental science that Plato assigns to dianoia; and hence Aristotle
describes the ﬁrst principles of demonstrative science as ‘assumptions’, hupotheseis. Aristotle preserves the
distinction between dianoia and noêsis by requiring nous to grasp the ﬁrst principles of science. But nous is not
dialectical, since it is not ratiocinative at all, but intuitive and immediate. Nor is it a universal science, since different
departmental sciences require different, and epistemologically independent, acts of intuition.
On the Platonic and the polemical origins of Aristotle's appeal to hupotheseis see Solmsen [1929], 105–7 (who points
out the connexion with Aristotle's foundationalism); Ross [1939], 266f (who states the important difference
between Plato's and Aristotle's conception of hupotheseis and archai); Barnes [1981], 35.
15. Derivation from proper principles is one of the conditions for demonstration, APo 71b22–3; in fact there is no
such thing as a demonstration unconditionally, but only demonstration from the proper principles, 76a13–15,
which must therefore be indemonstrable, 76a16–17, 31–2. The proper and primary principles, 72a5–6, are
contrasted with propositions that are merely true and endoxa, 74b24–6; and a genuine demonstration has a
conclusion homogeneous with the primary principles, in so far as it is derived from the proper principles,
76a26–30. The nature of the proper principles determines the appropriateness or inappropriateness of a question
addressed to a special scientist, 77a36–40. On proper appearances see 2n17.
Aristotle relies on the demand for proper principles to rule out excessively general arguments, GA 747b27–30,
748a7–11, including those involving Platonic Forms, MM 1183a39–b8; hence he contrasts oikeioi logoi with merely
‘logical’ argument, Phys. 264a7, b2, DC 294b11, EE 1217a9, Pol. 1323b38, Rhet. 1396b11. (See 2n46.)
16. This role for inquiry as a preliminary and support to intuition is stressed by Sidgwick [1907], 339–42.
17. Descartes develops Aristotle's view most thoroughly in his account of intuition and deduction, in Regulae iii (〉 AT
x. 366–70). He deﬁnes ‘intuition’ (which he admits he uses in an unfamiliar sense, 368) as ‘such an easy and distinct
conception of a puriﬁed and concentrated mind that no doubt at all about what we understand (intelligimus) is left;
or, what is the same thing, an indubitable conception of a puriﬁed and concentrated mind, arising solely from the
light of reason’, 368. The objects of intuition are simple and basic truths (e.g. I exist, I think, a triangle is bounded
by three lines, etc.). Like Aristotelian nous, intuition must be the basis of deduction, if deduction is to transmit truth
and certainty from premisses to conclusions, 369. Descartes's objects of intuition seem better than Aristotle's
candidates for being intuitive ﬁrst principles, since they seem less dependent for their justiﬁcation on inferential
connexions. On the other hand, it is hard to derive anything from them that is close to a ﬁrst principle of a special
science.
An empiricist may appeal to perception as a source of beliefs that seem unaffected by inferential connexions. See
Hume, Treatise, i.4.2, 190: ‘For

536

NOTES

since all acts and sensations of the mind are known to us by consciousness, they must necessarily appear in every
particular what they are, and be what they appear. Every thing that enters the mind being in reality a perception, ‘tis
impossible any thing should to feeling appear different. That were to suppose, that even where we are most
intimately conscious, we might be mistaken.’ Aristotle also picks perceptual judgments as examples of those that
are evident in themselves. But he does not think perceptual judgments about particulars can supply the proper
foundation for a scientiﬁc theory, since the theory describes relations between universals.
Both the rationalist and the empiricist simply postpone Aristotle's difﬁculties. We may be subjectively certain,
unwilling to entertain any doubt about an axiom or a perceptual judgment, it does not follow that we are justiﬁed in
trusting this subjective certainty. To ﬁnd some justiﬁcation for our trust, where can we turn but to inferential
connexions with other beliefs? Descartes seems to lead us back into this inquiry when he tries to justify conﬁdence
in his clear and distinct perceptions (in Med. iii–iv). Hume in fact insists that our subjective certainties have no
justiﬁcation at all, even though our lack of justiﬁcation does not affect our conviction. See Treatise i.4.2, 218: ‘ ‘Tis
impossible upon any system to defend either our understanding or our senses; and we but expose them further
when we endeavour to justify them in that manner.’ Once we look for something more than subjective certainty,
Aristotle's difﬁculties return for versions of foundationalism that initially seem more plausible than his.
18. Only a universal science could demonstrate the axioms, since they apply equally to all reality. But Aristotle insists
there is no such science, since a science depends on a special range of appearances (see n15). Moreover, if we
demonstrate the axioms, we must demonstrate them from some prior and better known principles, and what
would these be? All demonstration relies on the truth of PNC, and hence we can hardly ﬁnd a demonstration of it
see § 97.
19. Ross [1949], 543, Owen [1960], 190, Berti [1965], 38, Barnes [1975], 143, all take 77a29–31 to be counterfactual,
not referring to any science that Aristotle recognizes; it refers to the same science that would be kuria pantôn and is
rejected in 76a16–25. Philop. 142.20–143.3 takes 77a20 to refer to ﬁrst philosophy, and alludes to Met. iv—this is
quite reasonable, since the science that is described only counterfactually in the APo is taken to be actual in Met. iv.
In rejecting such a science Aristotle rejects the possibility of proving (deiknunai, 77a29) the common axioms, not
merely the possibility of demonstrating (apodeiknunai) them. Since Met. iv offers a proof, though not a
demonstration, of them, it conﬂicts with the APo.
Top. 172a11–13 mentions the universal scientist in the same counterfactual way. Probably ho katholou 〉 the
universal scientist, rather than the logos of a special demonstrative science (so Waitz [1844], ii.552, followed by
Owen); cf. Met. 1005a34–5 (reading tou katholou without the OCT's unnecessary supplement). Alex. in SE 93.26–33
identiﬁes ho katholou with ho theologos, whom he describes in terms similar to those of Met. iv, as studying ta koina,
and the intrinsic properties of beings. But he does not

NOTES

20.

21.

22.

23.
24.
25.

26.

537

attempt to combine this alleged recognition of a universal science with the claim that beings do not fall into one
genus (correctly reported in 94.1–14).
The Org. says nothing about who, if anyone, studies the axioms. Barnes, 142, cites Met. 1004b22, 1005a19–22, and
says, ‘The easy inference from these two passages, that logic 〈i.e. dialectic〉 too investigates the axioms, is drawn
explicitly at Top. 101a36–b3.’ The inference, however, is not drawn explicitly, since the Top. passage does not even
mention the axioms or common principles; Aristotle suggests only that the way to discuss the special principles,
oikeiai archai, 101a37–8, is through the common beliefs on each subject, 101b1. The difference from the Met. is
striking; see § 94. Berti [1965], 44, suggests that the axioms are the premisses of dialectic (but I think he
misunderstands koina in 170a34–b3, 171b5–6).
Aristotle's argument from the homonymy of being against a single science of being assumes that the subject-matter
of a single science cannot be homonymous, because a science must be demonstrative. (A syllogism is invalid if the
same deﬁnition cannot be substituted for different occurrences of the same term in the appropriate places; and the
terms in a demonstrative science must meet the necessary conditions for syllogistic validity.) This objection to a
universal science rests on the prior choice of demonstration as the appropriate form for science. See 8n51.
At 75a42, 76b9–11, 88b3, 27–9 Aristotle suggests that special and common principles have different roles; e.g., the
science argues from, ek, the special principles and through, dia, the common principles, 76b10. (Questions related
to the contrast are discussed by Husik [1906].) He does not stick to this contrast; see Ross [1949], 531, and the
suitably cautious remarks by Barnes, § 135. And in any case, the claim that common principles have a different role
would not remove the question about their epistemic status.
For examples of dialectical procedure see 90a36–b1, 91a12, 93a1–3, Aubenque [1961], 10f.
On the educated person see § 11.
See, e.g., the comparison between ‘speculative’ and ‘scientiﬁc’ philosophy in Reichenbach [1951], 303f. Speculative
philosophy has ‘sought to acquire a knowledge of generalities, of the most general principles that govern the
universe’, and its methods have been a priori. Scientiﬁc philosophy gives up this search for generality and for any
synthetic a priori truths, 47–9. On this conception, philosophy ‘is a logical analysis of all forms of human thought’;
it ‘is scientiﬁc in its method; it gathers results accessible to demonstration and assented to by those who are
sufﬁciently trained in logic and science’, 308.
Carnap [1956], 206–8, distinguishes internal questions, those arising within a linguistic framework recognizing a
system of entities, from external questions, those arising about the reality of the system of entities as a whole.
Internal questions are to be answered by the recognized methods of science; external questions are matters of
decision and convention, not to be answered by recognized scientiﬁc methods. Carnap's distinction between
scientiﬁc methods, on the one hand, and products of decision, is decisively criticized by Quine [1966], chs. 10–11.

538

NOTES

27. The assumption that knowledge must be based on knowledge is important in the last part of Plato's Tht., which
provides the source of several of Aristotle's problems in the APo. See Kosman [1973], 380f, Fine [1979],
Armstrong (see 6n24).

Chapter 8
1. Sophia in Met. i is discussed by Berti [1965], 98–100, Aubenque [1966], 220f, 266f.
2. On philosophia see 7n14.
Though Aristotle's early De Philosophia (discussed by Jaeger [1948], ch. 6, Décarie [1961], 36–8) is parallel to the
Met. in several ways (a historical survey, frr. 3–7 (OCT); criticism of the Theory of Forms, fr. 11), it does not seem
to be organized around the four causes, or to distinguish sophia or philosophia as a general science from theology (fr.
8). Its views ﬁt the conception of science in the Org.
Similarly, ‘ﬁrst philosophy’ in earlier works is concerned with the substance that is separate from matter and
change (Phys. 185a2–3, 20, 192a34–6, 194b14, GC 318a5–6, PA 641a36) with no reference to any universal
functions. See Mansion [1946], 217–24. Against Décarie's argument that the ‘mature’ conception of ﬁrst
philosophy is already present in the early works see Allan [1964].
3. Aristotle rejects the Platonist attempt to ﬁnd the ‘elements of all things’, 992b18–24; cf. 986a1–2. The Platonists
think the elements will be numbers and they think items in every category have elements in the same way. This
failure to attend to the categories is their failure to make distinctions. But he claims later that those who sought the
elements of beings were looking for the same things that he looks for in studying being qua being, 1003a28–32;
and he then explains how the different categories can be recognized without denying the possibility of a universal
science, iv 2. Owen [1960], 192, claims that 992b18–24 is ‘out of tune’ with 1003a28–32; but mê dihelontas, 992b19,
and touton ton tropon, b20, should remove any suspicion of disharmony. Probably Aristotle writes each of these two
passages (in i and iv) with the doctrine of the other in mind.
4. I assume that the Met. is doctrinally fairly uniﬁed, and in particular that vii–ix are meant to be continuous with i, iii,
iv, vi, as Ross [1924], p. xx, thinks; contrast Jaeger [1948], 198–204, Leszl [1975], 14. Some evidence of a
connected sequence is detectable, though not obvious, in iv–ix.
(1) iv 1–2 introduces (a) the science of being qua being, (b) the multivocity of being, and (c) the priority of
substance, with no explicit reference to (d) the doctrine of the categories (1003a33–b10).
(2) v 7 repeats (b) without (a) or (c), and introduces (d) as part of (b).
(3) vi 1–2, esp. 1026a33–b2, repeats (a) and (b) without (c), mentioning (d) without elaboration as part of (b).
(4) vii 1 refers to v 7. It asserts (a) and (b) with reference to (d), and

NOTES

539

explains (c) with reference to (d). (Here Aristotle refers to v 7 (rather than to iv or vi) because v 7 explains (d),
and vi only mentions it.)
(5) ix 1, 1045b32–4 refers to the list of types of being in vi, 1026a36–b2 and 1027b28–1028a4 (it skips the items on
the list that were dismissed in the second passage). 1046a4–6 refers to v 12. 1045b27–32 refers to the prôtoi logoi.
The claim that other beings will have the logos of substance recalls 1028a34–6, rather than iv 1–2. (See Burnyeat
et al. [1984], 48.) On the other hand, pros ho . . . anapherontai, 1045b27–8, recalls pros to prôton anapherontai,
1004a25–6, rather than vii 1. Whether prôtoi logoi refers to iv or to vii, Aristotle recalls both books.

5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.

The sequence is intelligible. While iv 1–2 asserts (c) without detailed explanation, v 7 and vi 2 introduce (d), and so
prepare for the explanation and defence of (c) through (d) in vii 1. In ix 1 Aristotle shows that he thinks he has
given such a defence and explanation in vii 1.
Connexion between vii and x is marked by 1053b16 (treated by Jaeger [1948], 202, in a rather arbitrary way). Some
connexion is likely between v and vii–ix; for v often arranges problems and summarizes discussions up to the
point where the argument of vii–ix begins. See Owens [1963], 86. For connexions between vii–ix and the later
books see 1037a12, 1042a22, 1076a8–10, Ross, p. xix, xxvii.
Owens [1963], 332, argues from the cross-references to Book v and the lack of cross-references to the rest of i–vi
that vii was probably written earlier than iv and vi. This argument loses force if we see the strategic reasons for
beginning vii from a new starting-point. See 10n2.
These are some reasons for thinking that the Met. is doctrinally uniﬁed. On the importance of the puzzles in iii see
n33.
See further 10n32.
Sceptical use of the history of philosophy: Sextus, PH i 88, iii 30–6, AM xi 173–4; Cicero, Ac. ii 117. Perhaps such
use goes back to Protagoras, though deﬁnite evidence is lacking (DK 80 B 2, 7 (〉 Met. 997b32–998a6) suggest
that he argues destructively against previous thinkers); historical examples could certainly be used to support his
claim that there are opposed arguments on every question (Diog. L. ix 51).
Descartes, Regulae iii, (〉 AT x 361f). On Descartes on intuition see 7n17.
For his views on dialectic see Regulae 〉 AT x 360–5; Principles 〉 ixb 13.
Aristotle, therefore, does not claim to be describing his predecessors' intentions, or to state their position in words
that they would themselves have used, 989a30–b6, b19–21, 993a17–24.
In Physics i–ii Aristotle describes the four causes only in ii 3, after already mentioning them, e.g. 194a18–21,
a27–b13. They do not explicitly control the discussion. PA i criticizes the Presocratics, and in particular criticizes
them for their neglect of the formal and ﬁnal cause, 640b4–29, 641a14–17, 642a13–31, but does not explain why
we must ‘see’ the different causes, 639b11, 640a13–19, or even distinguish the four causes clearly. The GC
mentions form and matter, but does not clearly connect them with the conception of a this and substance. Nor is
the connexion between formal and ﬁnal causation made clear.

540

NOTES

11. Some materialists try to explain change by recognizing different material elements, but without clearly explaining
the interactions that must be assumed to explain change, 984b5–8, 985a4–b4, b19–20. They are especially at a loss
to explain changes with good results, 984b8–22, 985a18–29; cf. 1075a38–b8, and see Ross, i.135f. The Eleatics
realize that materialism allows no explanation of non-essential change, and so reasonably, in Aristotle's view, reject
such change altogether, 984a29–b1.
12. Substance as subject: 983b7 (matter), 10, 16, 985b10, 986b8. Substance as essence: 983a27, 987b21, 988a35
(cf. GC 335b35), 991a13, b1, 993a18. 987a19 connects the two uses. See 9n10, § 107, Owens [1963], 190–3.
13. Here, in contrast to PA 642a13–28, GC 335b33–336a12, Aristotle does not appeal to teleology to justify belief in
the formal cause, presumably because he thinks (as Books iv–vii argue, and as Phys. 194b27–8 suggests) form is
defensible from more general grounds than those offered in the physical works.
14. See § § 57–8.
15. On ‘mumbling’, psellizesthai see Probl. 902b23–7. It suggests indeﬁniteness (cf. GC 328b9) and poor articulation
(cf. 989b5).
16. On several points Aristotle takes the Phaedo both as a target and as a model. Phd. 96aff argues that the Presocratics
were silent about the ﬁnal cause, and the formal cause, 96d–97b. On Anaxagoras see 97b8–98c2, Met. 984b8–20,
985a10–23. Socrates' ‘second-best route’, involving logoi (Phd. 99c6–100a7; cf. Met. 987b31–3) presents the formal
cause, but with the eventual aim of giving an account referring to the ﬁnal cause; in the Republic dialectic is
supposed to fulﬁl this aim, and so to provide ﬁrst principles for the departmental sciences. Plato displays the selfconsciousness about questions of method, and especially about the right form of explanation, that Aristotle
himself displays in the Metaphysics. He suggests the possibility of Aristotle's second-order science.
Aristotle's criticism of Plato also reﬂects the inﬂuence of Phd. 96ff. (See Fine [1987], 76–81.) He agrees with Plato's
search for the cause of an action as opposed to its necessary conditions (Phd. 98c2–99b2; cf. Phil. 26e–27a). But he
criticizes Plato's view of the explanatory role of Forms, 990a33–b2, 991a8–11, b3–8, 992a24–b1, b7–9, GC
335b9–17. And he argues against Plato for more than one type of genuine cause (he partly follows Plato himself.
Tim. 46c–e). But again he shows he thinks Plato has raised the right questions.
17. On Platonic dialectic see § 76. The discussions of method in Physics i–ii and PA i are the concern of the educated
person, PA 639a4–6; they do not belong to a second-order science. A dialectical survey of particular questions,
appearances, and puzzles is all that the educated person needs, since (in Aristotle's pre-Metaphysics view) the
methods of the particular sciences have no epistemological basis outside pure dialectic.
18. See Kant KrV A851/B879. On the name meta ta phusika see Reiner [1954], Aubenque [1966], 29, Merlan, [1957],
[1968], 238f, Owens [1963], 74n, Routila [1969], 18–23. The meta is most plausibly taken to refer to the fact that
the study of nature is better known to us, and that the topics of this

NOTES

19.
20.
21.

22.
23.

24.

25.

541

work come later than the study of nature. This explanation of meta, however, does not imply that the Met.'s primary
concern is with supersensible reality (an inference that Merlan, e.g., draws from the title); study of the principles
presupposed by the study of nature also comes after the study of nature in the order of discovery. This Kantian
conception of metaphysics, applying to the principles presupposed by the special sciences, is not necessarily alien to
Aristotle. (Kant also uses the term for the study of the super-sensible.)
For further discussion of this passage on puzzles see § 20.
The character of metaphysics as something ‘sought’ is emphasized, with considerable exaggeration, by Aubenque
[1966], esp. 250.
997a33–998a19 puts the ﬁfth puzzle in the right place (contrast 995b13–18, 1059a38–b21, 1060a3–4). Owens's
arguments, 233, do not undermine the distinction between methodological and substantive puzzles. Jaeger's lack of
emphasis on the methodological puzzles leads him to distort the focus of the puzzles as a whole; see [1948], 195,
and n33 below.
The connexion of the puzzles with Aristotle's own conception of demonstrative science is noticed by Mansion
[1955], 151f; but she does not suggest that Aristotle challenges this conception in Book iv.
The objection in the ﬁrst puzzle argues that there can be no single demonstrative science of all the types of cause,
since (a) causes are not contraries (which are studied by a single science, 996a20–1), and (b) the study of the causes
can be distributed among the departmental sciences, and need not be assigned to a single science, 996a21–b1
(Ross, i.227, and Owens, 221, offer explanations resting on less plausible assumptions). The objection turns on an
ambiguity in ‘study the causes’, taking it to mean (i) study some instance of e.g. the formal cause (as mathematics
does), rather than (ii) study the nature of the causes. (See Leszl [1975], 124.) The objection does not damage a
science concerned with (ii). The other side of the puzzle, 996b1–26, shows why it is hard to claim that a particular
ﬁrst-order science is prior and universal.
The objector in the third puzzle assumes that wisdom is the science of every sort of substance. Every
demonstrative science demonstrates the intrinsic coincidents about its subject; hence the demonstrative science of
all substances will demonstrate all the intrinsic coincidents, 997a17–21. (‘Science of F’ is referentially opaque,
implying a close explanatory connexion between something's being F and its being the object of scientiﬁc study.)
The puzzle clearly assumes that wisdom will be a demonstrative science, and, equally important, that it will be ﬁrstorder. Owens's suggested solution (‘the reduction in a non-generic way of all Entities 〈i.e. substances〉 to the
one primary type’, 231; cf. Reale [1980], 85) does not explain how a universal science of substance fails to threaten
the autonomy of the special sciences; and once we explain this, by showing that the universal science is secondorder, Owens's solution is unnecessary.
The initially surprising assumption that a science of substance would have to demonstrate the nature of substance
is explained by 1059a32–4 (see Ross, i.231). Once again Owens's suggestion (232; the coincidents must in some

542

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

NOTES

way be reduced to substance, since ‘only in this way could there be demonstration within the realm of Entity 〈i.
e. substance〉 itself ’) fails to meet the main difﬁculty raised by the puzzle.
The role of substance in Book i makes it reasonable for a putative universal science to study substance; see n12,
Reale [1980], 70, 85). The objector in the second puzzle asks: since it is not the task of any other single science, or
of all the sciences, to prove the axioms that are used, why should it be the task of the science of substance,
996b33–997a2? Moreover, to demonstrate the axioms, we must demonstrate them from principles assumed as
true, and these will be further axioms; if wisdom has to demonstrate these further axioms too, there will be an
inﬁnite regress. Apparently, then, the more ultimate axioms from which we demonstrate our initial axioms are
undemonstrated, and the universal science cannot after all claim to demonstrate all the axioms, 997a5–9. In any
case, the genus of the science of the axioms cannot be narrower than everything, since all the sciences use the
axioms, 997a9–11; but there is no universal genus. The objection assumes throughout that the universal science
must be demonstrative.
In some cases we seem to learn the nature of something by mentioning its constituents and the way they are
combined, 998a20–b3; but in other cases we know things through deﬁnitions involving species whose ﬁrst
principles are genera, 998b4–8. The references to constituents and deﬁnitions readily suggest material and formal
principles, so that the thesis and the antithesis of the puzzle need not be mutually exclusive.
An inﬁnite series of perishable principles might seem to involve an inﬁnite regress that must be rejected in favour
of a ﬁrst cause, 1000b24–9. But we need to know what sort of cause the ﬁrst cause would need to be, and what
sorts of causes can or cannot form an inﬁnite series; neither side of the puzzle is cogent before we consider the
types of principles that are relevant.
Several of the puzzles suggest that particulars and universals are rival candidates for being principles. The eighth
puzzle asks whether there is anything besides particulars, 999a24–b24, and the ﬁfteenth asks whether the principles
are particulars or universals, 1003a5–17. Questions about universals also arise when we consider the existence of
non-sensible principles (ﬁfth puzzle, 997b34–998a19), when we ask if the principles must be numerically one
(ninth puzzle, 999b24–1000a4), and when we consider the status of being and one, apparently the most generic
universals (eleventh puzzle, 1001a4–b25).
The antithesis of the eighth puzzle, 999b17–24, suggests a possible solution, since it suggests that we ﬁnd it hard
to believe in universals because we assume that they must be separated Platonic Forms. Aristotle argues that many
of the difﬁculties about the Forms result from mistakes about universals, 997b3–12, 999a19–22. Aristotle suggests
that universal predication does not imply separation; if it does not, the problem of separate existence should not be
combined with the problem of universals, and the two problems will become more tractable.
The ﬁfth puzzle asks if there are any non-sensible substances; the eleventh and twelfth ask about the claims of
mathematical objects to be substances;

NOTES

31.
32.
33.

34.

35.
36.
37.

38.
39.

543

and the ﬁfteenth asks how universals can be principles if they are not substances.
On the relation of ﬁrst to second substances see § § 42–3, 48, 60. If (as Phys. i 7–8 seems to suggest) we identify the
particular subject with matter, and the universal with form, the only sort of independent particular seems to be
formless matter. Aristotle's earlier views do not dissolve the puzzles in Met. iii.
Aristotle credits Plato with the discovery of the formal cause, and rejects Plato's conception of it as both (i) a
separable particular substance, and (ii) a universal. But he does not necessarily reject either (i) or (ii); in Bk iii he
raises a doubt about whether they can both be true of the same things. Cf. 1040b26–30, § 140 below.
Books vii–ix never refer explicitly to the puzzles, and never answer any of them directly; see Jaeger [1948],
196–201, [1912], 102. We might infer that the puzzles represent an earlier plan that was abandoned; Jaeger
attributes it to Aristotle's Platonist phase. Aubenque [1966], 310, also ignoring the emergence of the preliminary
questions, sees two conﬂicting perspectives in Aristotle. Books vii–ix, however, deal with highly relevant
preliminary questions; and the puzzles are all eventually answered by the end of the treatise; see Ross, p. xxiii. To
this extent they provide further evidence of the unity of the treatise; see n4. Owens, 256f, goes too far in denying
that iii presents a plan or programme for the rest of the treatise, though his further remarks about its role are quite
just.
Kant says it was the Antinomy of pure reason that ‘ﬁrst awoke me from the dogmatic slumbers and drove me to
the critique of reason itself in order to end the scandal of reason's ostensible contradiction with itself ’ (Letter to
Garve, 21 Sep. 1798 (〉 Zweig 99n). For references to comparisons between Met. iii and Kant's Antinomies see
Reale [1980], 94–6.
See the quotation from Descartes in § 84.
Kant, KrV B22–3. The result of dogmatic assertion is the sort of anepikritos diaphônia that Sextus describes, PH i
98.
In iii Aristotle avoids the standard dialectical device of appealing to multivocity in, e.g., ‘principle’ or ‘substance’.
He certainly thinks multivocity is relevant; for Met. v is entirely concerned with multivocals. (There are no good
reasons for doubting that Aristotle intended it to be part of the Met. See Owens, 86f. Ross, p. xxv, is more
sceptical.) But the dialectical appeal to multivocity will not answer the questions that are raised in iii. For judgments
about when and how a term is multivocal are not neutral and independent of theory; they rest on common beliefs
that may themselves be challenged (see § 27). Aristotle sees that arguments against the assumptions underlying
common beliefs are not answered by dialectical argument relying on the very assumptions being challenged.
Gewirth [1953], 579, argues cogently (with reference to questions about translation) against attempts to solve such
problems by appeal to homonymy.
On ‘new starts’ see 2n65.
In 1003a27 I understand phuseôs tinos 〈aitias〉, i.e. ‘they are the causes of some

544

40.
41.

42.

43.
44.

NOTES

nature kath' hautên’ (and so not its causes because of some coincident of it), not simply properties of it kath' hautên.
Ross's note is clearer than his and Kirwan's translations.
On elements of being see n3.
‘Being qua being’ is not (a) the name of a proper subset of beings, but (b) a description of a subset of the properties
of a being, and hence derivatively (c) a description of the study that is prescribed. On the phrase see Merlan [1968],
Routila [1969], 103–21, Happ [1971], 385–404. Kirwan [1971], 77, prefers (c) to (a), but does not consider (b).
Owens, 266, defends (a), arguing that non-substances are not beings qua beings. But non-substances can be
studied qua beings, in so far as they depend on substance; hence they are included in the study of being qua being.
Ascl. 124.5–6 also accepts (a).
Aristotle claims that the science of being is both (a) a general science concerned with all beings, and (b) the science
of the primary beings, those studied by theology. See 1005a33–b1, 1026a10–32, 1064a28–b14, Le Blond [1939],
51ff, Patzig [1960], 35–7, Décarie [1961], 177–82, Merlan [1960], ch. 7, [1968], 248–58, Owens, 298–300, Berti
[1965], 102–5, Leszl [1975], 21–47, Frede [1987]. If ﬁrst philosophy studies being qua being, abstracting from the
additional properties of natural and mathematical beings, then it will have some special objects of its own, if there
are beings that have only the properties of being qua being (they are persisting subjects of properties) and lack any
further properties to make them changeable and inseparable from matter; these special objects will be eternal and
separable. This is the sort of special object intended in 1026a13–16 (reading achôrista with the mss. in a14, against
OCT and Ross; see Owens, 296 n44), 1064a28–b1 (where 36–7 indicates the condition on which the science of
being will have special objects).
It does not follow that (i) being qua being is eternal and separable; or (ii) that the content of the science of being
depends on whether there are special objects for theology; or (iii) that the proper study of beings qua beings
requires study of them qua eternal and immaterial beings.
Aristotle suggests that if there were no beings higher than natural beings, then physics would be the primary
science, 1026a27–9, 1005a33–b2. There would still be a universal science; but since there would be no special
beings with only the properties of being qua being, the universal science of being could not completely describe any
actual beings, but would be a part of physics.
On abstraction 1061a28–b7, taken with 1077b17–1078a31, Phys. 193b31–5 (where ‘qua’ expressions often occur),
offers a helpful comparison. Abstraction is discussed by Mansion [1958], 206f, Leszl [1975], 26, Happ [1971],
395–9; see also 14n49.
In ‘being qua being’ Aristotle might intend any of four conceptions of being: (1) Predicative: we study beings as
items about which we can say something. (2) Ontological: we study them as things that are something, that have
properties. (3) Existential: we study them as existents. (4) Epistemological: we think of beings as items that really
are, and do not just seem, some deﬁnite way. Even if Aristotle uses ‘to be’ in a univocally

NOTES

45.
46.
47.
48.
49.

50.
51.

52.
53.

545

copulative sense (so that it always means ‘is . . . ’ with some predicate-place to be ﬁlled; see Owen [1965a], 260f), he
may intend any one, or more than one, of these four conceptions of being. But the second seems most prominent
in his conception of being as the object of a science, in 1003a23–6, 1025b9, 1061b6, 28–30. He assumes that a
being is something with essential properties and coincidental properties derived from them.
‘Focal connexion’ renders pros hen kai mian tina phusin, 1003a33–4. Owen [1960], 184, uses ‘focal meaning’ and
Owens, ch. 3, speaks of ‘pros hen equivocals’. See further Hamlyn [1977], Irwin [1981], 531, esp. n12.
This dependence may be existential or, as in 1003b6–10, logical or deﬁnitional; see further § 108.
On substance as subject (the Presocratic candidate) and essence (the Platonic candidate) see nn12, 31.
On logical questions see 2nn48–9. The connexion between (a) studying everything, (b) studying logical questions,
and (c) studying being qua being is marked by ei gar mê . . . , 1004b1, and epei oun, b5.
The student of being qua being is called the philosopher, 1003b19, 1004a34–b26. 1004a4 introduces ‘ﬁrst
philosophy’, studying the ﬁrst type of substance—i.e. the type conceived as being qua being, not the type conceived
by physics (being qua changeable). 1004b5–17, 1005a23–b2 explain the ﬁrstness of ﬁrst philosophy by the
universality of its concern with being qua being; and 1005a35 explicitly connects ﬁrstness with universality (Top.
172a13 supports Ross's text). If this is what ‘ﬁrst’ substance means, the science of being qua being and ﬁrst
philosophy are the same science, and Aristotle does not imply that ﬁrst philosophy studies only the beings that are
eternal and unchanging. Contrast, e.g., the account of ﬁrst substance in Mansion [1958], 171–3, and see n42 above.
This explanation of ‘second-order’ is meant to avoid the suggestion that a second-order inquiry has no ontological
commitments. For such a suggestion see Wieland, quoted in 1n6 above.
Aristotle argues that multivocity by itself does not preclude a single science, as long as we can rely on focal
connexion, 1004a22–5, 1005a5–11. But his argument does not undermine the claim in the Organon that a
demonstrative science cannot have a multivocal subject-matter; for a demonstrative science requires demonstrative
syllogisms, and a syllogism is invalid if it includes multivocal (even focally connected) occurrences of the same term
in the wrong place (see 7n21). In suggesting that focal connexion is sufﬁcient for a single genus studied by a single
science, Aristotle ought to be thinking of a non-demonstrative science. See Owen [1960], 192, [1965], 216f; his
exact view on the relation to the Org. on this issue is not clear. Routila [1969], 98–102, agrees with Owen in
stressing the importance of focal connexion in claiming scientiﬁc status for dialectic; I do not think he answers all
the challenges to scientiﬁc dialectic. The same question arises about Ferejohn [1980].
On ek tês toiautês epagôgês I follow 1064a8 (contrast Owens, 288, Ross, i.352). Cf. 1064a8–10, GA 742b32–4.
To demonstrate the axioms we would have to assume some prior truths

546

54.
55.
56.

57.
58.
59.

60.

NOTES

about being qua being and demonstrate the axioms as intrinsic coincidents (997a2–11); but no truths about being
seem to be prior to the axioms (997a11–15); hence the axioms are indemonstrable.
This may be the point intended in 1005b2–5. If so, the passage is in the right place (as Ross, i.263, following Bonitz
[1848], argues; Alexander and OCT think the passage misplaced).
At 1004b17–26 dialectic and sophistic indicate the scope of philosophy, because they have the universal concerns
that Aristotle has in mind for philosophy.
In Top. 159a25–37, 169b22–7, 171b3–12, 172a21–36, peirastic is one, but not the only, function of dialectic. (Ross,
i.260, and Kirwan, 85, wrongly claim that he always or sometimes fails to distinguish dialectic from peirastic.)
1004b25–6 is consistent with this distinction. Aristotle does not say (contrast Owen [1965], 216) that dialectic is
only peirastic, but that its only function in the area where ﬁrst philosophy seeks knowledge is peirastic. The force of
‘in the area’, peri hôn, is brought out by Colle [1924]: ‘Sur les mêmes objets, la Dialectique s'applique à éprouver le
savoir, la Philosophie à le produire.’ His commentary, however, 59f, is dominated by the assumption that
philosophy must be demonstrative.
Wilpert [1956], 255 (agreeing with Bonitz [1848], ii. 181f), identiﬁes the contrast between dialectic and philosophy
with the contrast between dialectical discovery and demonstrative presentation; but I think this answer fails to face
the real difﬁculty. Alex. 260.2–5 also refers to the non-demonstrative character of dialectic; though at 273.3–19 he
recognizes that 1006a11ff argues non-demonstratively, he does not try to reconcile the two comments. See further
Thurot [1860], 205, Le Blond [1939], 50–5, Berti [1965], 171–3, Leszl [1975], 293–301.
1061b6–10 explains how the dialectician and the sophist do not study being qua being. Dialectic, in its ‘logical’
function, is concerned with subjects common to all the sciences. But it is concerned with the coincidents of being,
not in so far as it is being, but in so far as they are commonly believed to belong to being.
See § § 35–6.
Contrast the apparent suggestion of Owen [1965], 216, that ‘the science of being’ is just a new name for dialectic:
‘The new science is not an axiomatic system; and lest it seem curiously like those non-departmental inquiries which
Aristotle had previously dubbed “dialectical” or “logical” and branded as unscientiﬁc, dialectic is quietly demoted
to one department of its old province so as to leave room for the new giant (cf. 1004b17–26 with SE 169b25 etc.).’
On 1004b17–26 see n56.
The close relations between metaphysics and dialectic are most strongly emphasized by Aubenque [1966], esp. 295;
he takes the dialectical character of Aristotle's argument to indicate the essentially inconclusive and permanently
aporetic character of his inquiry, and he argues, 299f, that the distinction drawn in 1004b25 would be justiﬁed only
if philosophy were a complete demonstrative system. Some of Aubenque's arguments are well discussed by
Brunschwig [1964], 185–96. Brunschwig, however, 196–200, regards Aubenque's view as substantially correct, as a
claim about the

NOTES

547

actual character and results of Aristotle's argument, as opposed to Aristotle's view of them.
61. see § 19.
62. He signals the agreement with Plato in anhupotheton, 1005b14, and bebaiotetê, 1005b17; cf. Rep. 511b6, 533d1.
Aristotle agrees with Plato on the crucial point that differs from the Organon; he thinks there is a universal science
that has the task of presenting scientiﬁc, though non-demonstrative, proof, by dialectical methods, of nonhypothetical ﬁrst principles. On the relation to Plato see Berti [1965], 159f; the degree of similarity is considerably
exaggerated by Décarie [1961], 79–84.
63. On ‘philosophy’ see above n2, 7n14.

Chapter 9
1. I discuss the ‘ontological’ formulation of PNC; see Lukasiewicz [1910], 51. The ‘logical’ version (it is not possible
for contradictory statements to be true, 1007b17–19, 1011b13–14) is equivalent to the ontological version if the
two statements are about the same subject (kata tou autou, 1011b16). On 1005b26–34 (not a ‘version’ or a proof of
PNC, but an argument to show we cannot be mistaken about PNC) see Lukasiewicz, 52, Barnes [1969a], Lear
[1980], 99–101.
Probably (cf. the reference to an extreme view, 1009a3–5) the opponent holds that PNC may always break down (i.
e. Poss [(x) (Fx & not Fx)]); hence Aristotle needs to claim that PNC cannot always break down (i.e. Nec [Ex (not
(Fx & not Fx)]). (See Dancy [1975], 59–61, Kirwan [1971], 102f.) And probably the opponent holds that PNC may
fail for every predicate (i.e. Poss [(x) (F) (Fx & not Fx)]. The denial of that would be to claim that PNC cannot fail
for every predicate (i.e. Nec [(Ex) (EF) (not (Fx & not Fx))]); and this denial is the conclusion Aristotle defends in
iv 4, arguing that PNC must be true for essential properties of the subject. (See Anscombe [1961], 41, Kirwan, 93.)
Even if, with Kirwan, we think Aristotle does not always conﬁne himself to rejecting these extreme theses, an
answer to them will be sufﬁcient for the point he wants to make about subjects.
2. It is important to stress the grounds for believing that Aristotle intends iv 4 to practise the scientiﬁc argument of
ﬁrst philosophy, not merely to prepare for the science by dialectical argument. The ‘preparatory’ view is suggested
by Ross, i.252, by Frede [1987], 94f, and perhaps by Code [1986]. I do not think it ﬁts the implied claim in
1005a29–31, that the ﬁrst philosopher, as such, will offer non-demonstrative, non-dialectical defence of the
axioms. Once we admit that Aristotle claims this, it is hard to maintain that iv 4 is not meant to justify the claim. If
iv 4 is not part of ﬁrst philosophy, something like it must be, if the claim in iv 3 is to be defended; so we still face
the same difﬁculty that we face if we regard iv 4 as a part of the science Aristotle describes.
To claim that ﬁrst philosophy is to this extent non-demonstrative is not

548

3.

4.

5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.

NOTES

to claim that it is wholly non-demonstrative. As Frede remarks, many of its propositions could well be presented in
demonstrative form. It differs from the special sciences in not regarding its ﬁrst principles as unargued
assumptions.
The argument proceeds: (1) First O speaks of something, 1006a12–13. (2) We ask O to agree that he signiﬁes
something, a18–22. (3) O agrees that he does signify something, a26–7. (4) We consider the consequences of
signifying something, a29–30. (5) We consider the consequences of signifying one thing, a30–1. (6) Aristotle
explains parenthetically why the move from (4) to (5) is justiﬁed, because signifying something requires signifying
one thing, b5–11.
Aristotle undertakes to show the impossibility of O's thesis, 1006a11–12, which is that PNC is false and O believes
it is false. In fact he argues against both parts of O's thesis, and the ﬁrst lengthy argument concludes by asserting
PNC, 1006b33–4. This is not surprising, since Aristotle has already implied that ﬁrst philosophy will undertake to
say that the axioms are true, 1005a29–31 (see above n2). He is unlikely, then, to be concerned primarily (as Code
[1986] claims) with the indubitability of PNC; see Cohen [1986], Furth [1986] (both expressing reservations about
Code's view).
I assume that the signiﬁcate is (a) the subject—man—of which O predicates contradictory properties, rather than
(b) the sense of ‘man’. Dancy's objections to Aristotle ([1975], ch. 6, criticized by Lear [1980], 108f) assume (b). On
signiﬁcation see Anscombe [1961], 39, Noonan [1976], Kirwan [1971], 95f, Irwin [1982]. Aubenque's
interpretation of the defence of PNC, [1966], 124–9, captures its transcendental aspects well, but seems to me
to overestimate its concern with language and with senses of words.
Aristotle rightly sets aside appeals to multivocity, 1006a34–b5. If O claims that ‘man’ is multivocal, but refuses to
distinguish different signiﬁcates, we cannot say if O is really denying PNC, 1006b5–11.
This does not mean that O must have any beliefs about what the essential property is, or that anyone must have
such beliefs.
If we were only concerned with signifying of one subject, in the way that ‘musical’, ‘white’, and ‘man’ may all signify
of one subject that has all these properties, we could not insist that being man cannot signify not being man. For
‘man’ could easily be predicated of something of which ‘not man’ could also be predicated. (Suppose, e.g., that
something is both a man and white, and white is not the same as man; then ‘man’ and ‘not man’ would be
predicated of the same subject, and would signify the same thing, if signifying of the same subject is sufﬁcient for
signifying the same thing.)
O might perhaps say that he is not denying that man is biped animal, and therefore is not denying that it is the
same subject; he is only saying that this subject is also not biped animal. But he can hardly maintain this with the
standard conception of negation, which we need to use to understand O's thesis as he intends it to be understood
in the ﬁrst place (in asserting that man is not F).
1007a21, 27, 31 refer to substance as essence. But a34, 35, b10 (hen ex

NOTES

11.
12.

13.
14.

15.

549

hapantôn), refer to substance as subject. As before (see 8n12) Aristotle assumes a connexion that needs to be
defended; see § 107.
This point needs a more complex statement to take account of the difference between necessary and essential
properties; but the complications will not affect the main point.
Aristotle does not, e.g., rule out every sort of ‘bare particulars’; see 3nn19, 57–8, 4nn19, 22. The minimal character
of his claims counts against those (see Lear [1980], 109, Code [1986], 346) who take the reference to essence and
substance to show that the argument against PNC assumes distinctively Aristotelian metaphysical claims. (Code
uses this alleged feature of the argument to show that it cannot embody what I have called ‘strong dialectic’.)
On the dialectical character of this argument see Ross, [1923], 57 (who cites it as ‘the best specimen of an
establishment of ﬁrst principles by dialectic’, of the sort promised in Top. i 2), Berti [1965], 42, 146f, 158. See also
7n20 above.
Aristotle is concerned with dialectical question-begging, assuming something not conceded by a particular
interlocutor. An attempted demonstration will beg the question ‘according to truth’ only if it tries to prove through
itself something that is not known through itself, APr 64b34–65a4, Top. 155b10–16, 158a7–13, 162b31–163a28,
APo 91b15–17. We might, therefore, claim that a purported demonstration of PNC through itself is not questionbegging. But such a defence against the charge of question-begging has to concede for a different reason that we
have not demonstrated PNC; for we cannot demonstrate a proposition through itself, but only from prior and
better-known ones. On question-begging see Lear [1980], 100f, who offers a different defence of the nonquestion-begging character of an attempted demonstration of PNC. Hamblin [1970], 74f, stresses the contextdependent character of allegations of begging the question.
Lukasiewicz [1910], 55, argues that Aristotle contradicts himself in claiming both that PNC is indemonstrable and
that it can be demonstrated elenctically. His argument fails to distinguish syllogism from demonstration. (See also
Maier [1896], iia. 359.) If we show that PNC is implied by something the respondent says, that is no ﬂaw in an
argument by refutation for PNC. A refutation is a ‘syllogism of the contradiction’, APr 66b11, Top. 170b1, and we
have no syllogism unless the respondent concedes some premisses, APr 66b4–17. The premiss he concedes must
conceal its implications from him (cf. Met. 1062a5–9, Top. 156a7, 156b18–157a6); this is a normal dialectical tactic
that would be out of place in a demonstration.
1062a2–11, 30–5, speaks of demonstration ad hominem, which, unlike an unqualiﬁed demonstration, relies on a
principle conceded by the interlocutor. On argument ad hominem see Aubenque [1966], 129f, Dancy [1975],
14–16. On demonstration by refutation Aubenque, 124, aptly cites Phys. 254a27.

550

NOTES

16. On concealment see 2n68. On refusing to allow the question to be begged see below § 104.
17. Sextus concedes the truth of a similar charge against the sceptic, AM xi 163.
18. Code [1986] offers a different account of Aristotle's aims. I am not sure if he denies that Aristotle aims to give a
reason for believing PNC to be true, since he does not consider precisely this possible aim. When he claims an
elenctic demonstration does not yield the knowledge of why PNC is true, he appeals to the fact that it does not
demonstrate from prior principles. But such a demonstration would not be the only way to give a reason for
believing PNC to be true. See also Furth [1986].
19. Nussbaum [1986], 254, denies that Aristotle intends the realist conclusion ‘that can be known to hold
independently of all experience and all ways of life, all conceptual schemes’. But her argument only shows that
Aristotle uses evidence drawn from experience, ways of life, and conceptual schemes. The use of such evidence (who
could reasonably avoid it?) does not preclude maintaining the realist conclusion I have described.
20. The problem of conﬂicting appearances arises as follows:
(1) The senses are the criterion of truth.
(2) Sometimes the senses report that an object has both a property and its negation (the water is hot and cold, the
tower is round and square, etc.), 1009a33–b4.As Aristotle reports him, Democritus inferred:
(3) The senses' reports in (2) imply that things violate the Principle of Non-Contradiction.
(4) But things do not violate the Principle of Non-Contradiction.
(5) Therefore we cannot trust the senses.
(6) Therefore, by (1), we have no access to how things really are, 1009b11–12.
(See Burnyeat [1979], 76–9.) Democritus rejects the claims of the senses, and, left with no other criterion, seems to
be driven to scepticism. Protagoras accepts (1), and wants to reject (6), by denying (5). Since he accepts (2) and (4),
he must reject (3). Aristotle's claim that Protagoras or his followers ‘must’ deny PNC, 1007b20–3, 1009a6–15,
probably means not that they explicitly deny it, but that their position commits them to the denial of it even against
their will.
21. I assume that Plato's Tht. gives a good account of the doctrine that Aristotle ascribes to Protagoras; see 152b–e,
153e–154a, 156c6–157c3. On this view, an apparent contradiction such as ‘Socrates is tall and short’ turns out not
to be a real contradiction because it is covertly relational, Phd. 102b3–6, and does not count against the veracity of
the senses. Protagoras applies the same strategy to heat and cold, Tht. 152b, to quantities, 152d, and to all sensible
qualities, 153e.
22. On the interpretation of Protagoras' position see Fine [KPC]. The sceptical thesis appealed to ancient sceptics as
well as modern. On the subject see Sextus, AM vii 167, 177, 248; PH i 48. Doubts about external existence: AM
vii 191, 194, 297; PH i 19, 22, 212. Burnyeat [1982], 36–43, seems to

NOTES

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

551

me to underestimate their scope (i.e. their logical implications, as distinct from the consequences that the doubters
explicitly mentioned).
Aristotle does not explicitly connect 1010a1–15 (on ﬂux) with Protagoras. But the Tht. and Sextus, PH i 217–19,
make the connexion clear. Cratylus, 1010a10–15, represents the comic extreme of Protagoras as well as of
Heracleitus.
Tht. 156c6–e7 calls these two types of objects ‘parents’ and ‘offspring’. This passage justiﬁes Sextus in claiming that
Protagoras believes in some underlying matter, PHi 218.
On prime matter see 4n30.
Cf. 1063a27; Aristotle does not mean to prohibit all qualitative change, but to draw attention to the particular kind
of quality that constitutes the form and essence of the subject.
In his ﬁrst argument against total change, 1010a15–22, Aristotle argues that even ceaseless change requires some
stability: what is ceasing to be white must still be partly white, and so must be stable to this degree, a18–19. But
Protagoras cannot afford to allow this, since the subject could appear to be not partly white; and if this appearance
were false, the senses would deceive us. To avoid admitting this Protagoras must believe in change in every respect;
but this is inconsistent with the stability in some respect that is presupposed by change. Moreover, to say what
change this is we must identify the termini, EN 1174b5, Phys. 224b1–10. But any description we use to identify
them must also be restricted by Protagoras' demands, 1063a21; the termini must also be changes, and therefore
identiﬁed by further termini, and Aristotle claims that this is a vicious inﬁnite regress, 1010a19–22.
At Tht. 182d1–e5 Plato relies on points similar to those Aristotle makes about the termini of change (n21 above).
The Heracleitean has to say ‘not thus’ about any terminal property, 183a9–b5. This is ‘not thus’ said to inﬁnity,
about any description of a terminus, 183b4–5, and Aristotle insists that this refusal to characterize the terminus
cannot go on to inﬁnity, 1010a21–2. Plato now takes himself to have refuted Protagoras, 183b7–c4. He has failed,
however, to explain exactly what is wrong with the view he has rejected. Aristotle offers an explanation, by arguing
that change requires a single subject, and someone who cannot allow essential properties cannot allow a single
subject.
see § 161.
On the Megarians see § 123.
see § 2.
For these tropes see Plato, Tht. 157e–158e, Sextus, PH ii 51 ff, Long [1981], 90f, Annas [1986], 85f.
Instead of saying that whatever appears is, the Revised Protagorean must say that it is to the perceiver to whom it
appears when it appears, in the respect and the way it appears, 1011a22–4. If it appears white to me, then it is white
to me now, in respect of this appearance. The RP reduces his position to near-tautology, once the force of the
qualiﬁcations is understood. In 1011a25–b1 Aristotle argues that the retreat from Protagoras to

552

34.
35.
36.

37.
38.
39.

NOTES

the RP position is (a) necessary, a25–8, and (b) sufﬁcient, a28–b1, to avoid violation of PNC.
In a28–34 I follow Bonitz [1848] in accepting the ms. text and treating all' ou ti tê(i) autê(i) 〈sc. tanantia phainetai〉,
a34, as the RP's defence, showing that the RP need not violate PNC. In 1011b1, hôste tout' an eiê alêthes, Aristotle
endorses the RP's claim to avoid violation of PNC, but at once goes on to insist that the RP himself cannot regard
his claim as true without qualiﬁcation.
1011b4–12 mentions consequences of RP, ﬁrst (a4–7) for the account of becoming, and then (a7–12) for the
account of the perceiving subject. The RP's statements about perceivers must be qualiﬁed by reference to
perceivers, causing an inﬁnite regress, b12. Aristotle does not present this as an inconsistency in the RP.
Aristotle's appeals to examples (cf. PH ii 54) all fall victim to the sceptical tropes, involving circular argument (i
169), and inﬁnite regress (i 166, 173).
The rejection of demonstration leads Aubenque to pure dialectic, and Berti to intuition; see 8n60 and n36 below.
For the second type of nous cf. perhaps EN 1143a35–b5 (but there is no reason to think that Aristotle regards this
as intuitive knowledge independent of inferential justiﬁcation). A large role is assigned to nous in Book iv by Berti
[1965], 185f; in his view, philosophy ‘non procede dimonstrativamente e si identiﬁca col nous essa stessa’, 156. But
he recognizes a role for dialectic, 157f.
An appeal to nous is read into the argument by Hamelin [1920], 235, on the ground that if Aristotle had founded a
ﬁrst principle of science on dialectical argument, ‘il aurait contredit la distinction capitale qu'il a si déﬁnitivement
aperçue et posée entre la dialectique et la science’. See 2n79.
See §§ 68–9.
In Phys. i, by contrast, Aristotle does not offer dialectical arguments to prove his ﬁrst principles, but only to prevent
common sense from being taken in by Eleatic arguments. In his own arguments he is rather indiscriminate about
the sorts of common beliefs he appeals to; among them he includes his own doctrine of the categories, taken to
reﬂect common sense. In appealing to common beliefs he never suggests that any of them has any further feature
that makes them suitable for the defence of a ﬁrst principle. see § 36. On all these points Met. iv is different; and
each difference helps to explain the others.

Chapter 10
1. I take ‘always’ to refer to the present and past, not to imply that the puzzles will continue in the future (contrary to
the suggestion of the present participles); see Brunschwig [1964], 190n, 192. But I do not agree with Brunschwig's
view that ti to on and tis hê ousia ask about the extension of ‘being’ and ‘substance’ rather than for a deﬁnition.
Though certainly the

NOTES

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.

7.

8.

553

Presocratics had explicitly discussed the extension without raising the Socratic question about the deﬁnition, and
though vii 2 is concerned with the extension, Aristotle might reasonably claim that the Presocratics had been
implicitly concerned with the deﬁnitional question. Brunschwig agrees, 194, that the Socratic question is raised at
the beginning of vii 3. But if we admit this, we can hardly say it is absent in vii 1; for the initial outline in vii 3
answers the question in vii 1, and is itself discussed further in the rest of vii.
Book vii does not refer explicitly to iv, but only to the division of the categories in v 7. See 8n12. But failure to
mention iv is intelligible in the light of Aristotle's aim. For he wants to show that the doctrine of the categories
provides a new starting-point, apparently independent of the starting-point of iv, from which we raise some of the
questions that were raised in iv.
On the two criteria for substance see § 28.
On the independence of substance see § 43.
In 1028a24 to badizon etc. are grammatically suitable for referring to an ordinary subject, e.g. a man; cf. Top. 103a30,
b30, 4n7, 25, 6n9, 10n45.
Leibniz (〉 Alexander), 70, states clearly this claim about the dependence of particular non-substances on
particular substances: ‘ . . . two individual subjects . . . cannot have precisely the same accidents; it being impossible,
that the same individual accident should be in two subjects, or pass from one subject to another.’ See Clatterbaugh
[1973], 3f, 65f, Mates [1986], 196f. On non-substantial particulars see 3n21.
If this point is conceded to Aristotle, it still leaves further questions: (1) A substance still seems to be inseparable
from its propria or intrinsic coincidents, which are necessary but non-substantial; cf. § 32. It is not clear, however,
that this must be, e.g., some particular determinate capacity for learning grammar, as opposed to some instance or
other of that type of capacity. (2) It still seems to require the existence of some non-substance or other, even if not
of any particular one. (3) If universals are separable from particulars, particular substances may not be prior to
universal non-substances. None of these questions necessarily refutes Aristotle. His claims about priority amount
to a statement of apparently necessary conditions for being a substance. The rest of his discussion should show
how many of them, under what interpretation, are genuinely necessary conditions. See § § 139, 144. On separation
and priority see Fine [1983], 25–9, [1984], 34–9, Morrison [1985], 130–8.
In 1028a32–3 I prefer the text of Asclepius, 377.7–8 which reads kai phusei kai logô(i) kai chronô(i) kai gnôsei (but I
would delete kai chronô(i) as an inexact gloss on phusei), to OCT's kai logô(i) kai gnôsei kai chronô(i). Reasons: (a)
Asclepius explains only three of the four types of priority, the ﬁrst explanation being concerned with chôriston,
derived from 1028a23–4. (b) Separability is more usually connected with natural priority. See 1019a2, 4n18, 6n18.
(c) If we delete chronô(i) from Asclepius' text, then the three types of priority are explained in the order of
introduction; and we expect either this order (ABC/ABC) or chiastic order (CBA/ABC) (hence

554

9.
10.

11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

NOTES

Alexander gives CBA, 460.35, and ABC, 461.29). The ms. order (CAB/ABC) is open to suspicion.
This comment shows nothing about priority unless he means that the converse is not true.
The explanation shows that Aristotle appeals to the frequent use of ‘ousia’ to refer to essence; and his claim about
the role of essence in knowledge is correct. But this does not seem to show what is needed about substance; nonsubstances also have essences, and in ﬁnding them we do not seem to refer to substance. Aristotle refers to
substance-as-essence to defend a claim that has seemed to concern primarily substance-as-subject.
On the relation between the subject-criterion and the essence-criterion in the Catg. see § 42.
In Phys. 200b27, 35, 201b26, GC 317b9, 21, 27, 31, 318b1, 319a12, DA 402a24, ‘this’ is used for the category of
substance (cf. 5n8). ‘What is it’ or ‘what’ is used at Top. 103b22 (see 3n17), 178a7, APo 83a21, 85b20, GC 381a15,
Met. 1017a25. See Ross [1924], i.p.lxxxviii, Apelt [1891], 140. Only Met. vii 1 juxtaposes the two terms.
In vii 2, in contrast to earlier works, but in harmony with the aporetic starting-point provided by Book iii, Aristotle
does not take the claims of any candidate for granted; he mentions candidates favoured by common sense
(animals, plants, and their parts), Presocratics (the four elements), and Platonists (Forms, mathematical objects),
without any initial decision between them.
Ross translates 1028b33–4, ‘if not in more senses, still at least to four main objects’; and one might (cf. Alex. 463.
18–19) take en tetarsin as 〉 tetrachôs. But Aristotle shows no sign of conceding that these are four acceptable
deﬁnitions of ousia, which would be needed for a pollachôs legomenon. Probably pleonachôs is equivalent to pollachôs, and
en tetarsin implies that ousia is not being treated as a pollachôs legomenon.
In the Organon Aristotle assumes with little argument (1) that there are ﬁrst (particular) and second (universal)
substances; (2) the subject-criterion (see § 28); (3) successful candidates (particular men, horses, and their species
and genera; occasionally stuffs). In the Phys. and GC (1) the status of universals is not clear; (3) candidates include
form, matter, and compound; but (2) alternatives to the subject-criterion are not discussed, even though it seems
to favour matter. see § 47.
Met. v 8 makes a useful transition from the relatively unself-conscious and inexplicit discussions in earlier works to
the fuller statement of the problem in Met. vii. It seems to offer (A) four candidates: (A1) simple bodies and their
compounds; (A2) their internal cause of being; (A3) limiting and deﬁning parts; (A4) essence, 1017b10–23. (B)
Two apparent criteria follow: (B1) ‘the last subject, which is no longer said of another’; (B2) ‘whatever, being a this,
is also separable—such is the shape and the form of each thing’, 1017b23–6.
The relation between the candidates and the summary in 1017b23–6 is not clear. (B1) seems to repeat (A1); (B2)
best ﬁts (A2) and (A4), if we can understand how an essence can be a this. But (A3) is harder. Ross ad loc.

NOTES

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

555

and Dancy [1975], 96, suggest it is included in (B2); Kirwan [1971] thinks it is omitted in the summary. Perhaps,
however, it is included in (B1). It is also not clear why (A4) is a candidate rather than a criterion; or whether the
two criteria are supposed to be equally legitimate; or how (B2) is justiﬁed. Book vii clariﬁes these issues.
Aristotle's rejection of the view that ‘substance’ has different senses or radically different types, legitimately puzzles
some critics. See, e.g., Cousin [1935], 168: ‘No doubt it is human to ﬁnd difﬁculty in believing that things meant by
the same word can be in any important sense different. But in Aristotle, despite the masterly analysis of which he is
capable, the disease reaches such a height that I can only envy the moderation of the Provost of Oriel 〈i.e. Ross,
ii.161; cf. i.p. xcii〉 when he remarks that in the notion of substance two notions “are somewhat unsatisfactorily
blended”.’ On the other side, both Owen [1978], 280, and Code [1984], 7, reject the solution invoking different
senses of ‘substance’.
In the predication-formula (cf. 1017b23–4) ‘said of ’ should include both strong predication and inherence, as the
Catg. construes them. More important, ‘it is no longer 〈said〉 of another thing’ corresponds to the Catg. account
of a ﬁrst substance, 1b3–6. In the Catg. this second clause is not necessary for being a subject or for being a
substance. (Contrast Furth [1985], 104.) Catg. 2b15–22, 2b37–3a6 counts second substances as substances, on the
assumption that they are subjects; but they are not subjects according to vii 3.
On the translation see n24 below. Alexander's fairly loose paraphrase of 1029a1–2 (463.24–6) omits prôton; but
since he has to hupokeimenon pasi where Aristotle has hupokeimenon alone, he may have thought prôton superﬂuous
after this.
Phys. 191a19–20 contrasts the subject, i.e. the matter, with the form, and contrasts each with the compound (not so
called), which is ‘substance, this, and being’, 191a8–12. Here the form and the matter seem to be prior in deﬁnition
to the compound, which seems to exist because the form (universal) is predicated of the particular bit of matter.
From most points of view, then, matter seems to be prior, and it is hardest to see how form could be a prior
subject.
Met. v 8 distinguishes the ultimate subject from the form, which is separable and a this, 1017b23–6. Unlike the
Phys., it treats the form as a this, but, like the Phys., it still contrasts the form with the subject.
Bonitz [1848], ii.301, ﬁnds the suggestion that form is subject so surprising that he suggests it is an oversight
caused by Aristotle's habit of mentioning matter, form, and compound together. He comments correctly that
Aristotle discusses form only when he discusses essence, not in his explicit discussion of the subject-criterion; but
that is the whole point of Aristotle's solution. As Ross, ii. 164, and Frede [1985], 75, remark, the connexion of
form with subject is reasserted at 1042a28. See also Owens [1963], 328n.
Aristotle's acceptance of the subject-criterion is rightly stressed by Cousin [1933], 327, and by Frede. It is
overlooked by Haring [1956], 315.
On making a new start see 8n38.

556

NOTES

22. Burnyeat [1984], 1f, presents some exaggerated objections to the view (see Ross, ii.226) that viii 1 summarizes vii.
Some of them rest on dubious claims about the treatment of the different candidates for substance in vii. The
claim that ‘nothing is said to recall the challenge to hupokeimenon as substance’ wrongly assumes that Aristotle has
challenged the subject-criterion. The claim that 1042a27–8 ‘blandly accepts hulê with a justiﬁcation in terms of the
actual/potential distinction to which again nothing in vii corresponds’ ignores 1035a1–2, 1038b6, 1040b5–10,
which prepare for viii 1 quite well.
23. For different views about the strategy and conclusions of vii, and its connexion with viii and ix, see, e.g., Owens,
415f, Rorty [1973], 393–5. Owen [1978] and Code [1984] raise general issues about Aristotle's intentions. I do not
agree with Owen's view (287) that in Aristotle's view (a) pursuit of the subject leads to prime matter, and (b) pursuit
of essence leads to the universal. On the contrary, I think Aristotle believes that (a) and (b) seem to be true only if
we misunderstand subject, 1029a9–10, and essence, 1038b4–5. For similar reasons, I believe Code exaggerates the
degree to which vii is an exposition rather than a categorical solution (which I would ﬁnd in, e.g., 1028b31–2,
1029a7–9, 1032a10–11, 1035b3, 1037a21, 1038b1–6, 1041a3–5) of the puzzles in iii.
24. This passage forces attention on some connected ambiguities (marked by (a) and (b) below) in vii 3, affecting
points of translation. Two versions are possible:
(1) 1029a1: (a) It seems most true to call the ﬁrst subject (i.e. the subject) substance. (b) The ﬁrst subject (as distinct
from the subject) seems to be substance to the highest degree.
(2) 1029a10, 26–7: Matter turns out to be (a) an instance of substance; (b) . . . identical to substance.
(3) 1029a27–8: (a) It seems most true to ascribe separability and thisness to substance (i.e. every substance is
separable and a this). (b) Separability and thisness seem especially characteristic of substance (i.e. the mark of a
substance par excellence).
(4) 1029a29–30: (a) Form and compound rather than matter would seem to be substance (i.e. matter would not
seem to be substance). (b) Form and compound would seem to be substance more than matter (i.e. to a higher
degree than matter).
Since the (a) versions conﬂict with 1029a32–3 (where tritês 〉 tritês ousias), and since 1029a19 takes (2b) rather than
(2a) to be the issue, it is reasonable to accept the (b) versions, which yield a clear and consistent argument for the
whole chapter.
Ross in the TO accepts (4a). In [1924], ii.165f, he accepts (3b) and (4b), but seems to think (n. on 1029a27) that
(2a) is the thesis under discussion (and see i.p.xciv). Owens, 332f, is close to (b). Cousin [1933], 325, and Haring
[1956], 316, accept (a). Owen [1978], 13, accepts (2a) and (4a).
The very helpful discussion in Kung [1978] defends (2b), (3b) and (4b). Against her claim that Aristotle intends the
subject-criterion, separability,

NOTES

25.
26.

27.

28.
29.
30.
31.

557

and thisness to be independent sufﬁcient conditions for substance: (i) Aristotle's claim to have given the answer in
outline, 1029a7–8, usually means that it needs clariﬁcation, not that it gives only a sufﬁcient condition (cf. EN
1098a20–2). (ii) 1038b15 suggests (as Kung says) that the subject-criterion is sufﬁcient and not merely necessary;
but 1042a26 suggests no other sufﬁcient conditions (see 12n30). (iii) She overlooks the connexion, implied by vii 4,
between the subject-criterion and thisness.
It is important that he does not say the predication-formula vindicates the claim of matter to be substance. See
n39, 12n30.
In 1029a23–4 he explains that (1) all the non-substantial properties are predicated of substance (i.e. the ordinary
putative substances) and (2) substance is predicated of matter (cf. 995b35, 1049a35). 1029a21–3 explains that this
requires a subject distinct from the categorial properties, because (a) each non-substantial property is predicated of
a putative substance as its subject, and (b) this putative subject is in turn predicated of a further subject, its matter.
The two subjects of predication correspond to the two stages of the removal described above.
In saying this Aristotle is free to insist that it is necessary for any bit of matter at any time to have some categorial
property or other; he is not describing some strange entity that is capable of existing without any categorial
property. Nor does the denial of categorial properties imply that the subject cannot essentially have, e.g., some
deﬁnite material composition. If this is so, the passage offers no prima facie evidence for a doctrine of prime
matter. Among those who claim to ﬁnd such prima facie evidence here see Cousin [1933], 326, Haring [1956], 316,
Sokolowski [1970], 276, Charlton [1970], 138 (who takes this to be an opponent's line of thought), Schoﬁeld
[1972], Robinson [1974] (discussed by Stahl [1981]), Owen [1978], 288, Kung [1978], 151, Williams [1982], 212,
Charlton [1983], Sorabji [1985], 3–7 (who discusses views connecting prime matter with extension). If Aristotle
believes in prime matter (see 4n30), that will indeed turn out to be the ultimate subject; but the argument of vii 3 is
quite neutral on what the basic type of matter will be—it is as non-committal as 1044b2, 1049a24–7 are.
On the puzzling character of form see § 49.
The passage is quoted and discussed at § 138.
This claim might seem to conﬂict with 1049a29–30, where the example of the ﬁrst type of subject is ‘man, both
body and soul’, which might seem to be the compound rather than the form. But this is not a serious objection, if
body 〉 proximate body, since proximate body 〉 soul. see § 132.
Bonitz [1848], ii.303 (followed by Ross, ii.166, and Jaeger [1948], 199) gives two reasons for transposing
1029b3–12 to follow 1029a34: (1) The transposition provides a clearer antecedent for enia peri autou in b13. (2) The
essence is not better known to us. Von Arnim [1928], 39f, followed by Owens, 347n, moves b1–3 to before
homologountai, a33, following Bonitz on (2), but not on (1). See also Arpe [1938], 31, Leszl [1975], 467.
Against (1): autou 〉 essence is not too strained, if b3–12 is an explanatory parenthesis. Against (2): the concept of
essence is quite familiar from

558

32.

33.
34.

35.

36.

NOTES

dialectic, and Aristotle introduces it with some ‘logical’ remarks. (For ‘logical’ cf. 1041a28, without OCT's deletion.)
He approaches the puzzling (1029a33) notion of form by referring to familiar views about essence (Ascl. 383.17).
Hence b3–12 need not be transposed.
Critics who favour the transposition take b3–12 to be contrasting the cognitive and ontological status of sensible
substances with that of non-sensible substances (see Owens, 347f; the view is present in Alex. 465. 19–22,
Aquinas, in Met. 1300). The passage justiﬁes no such contrast, since the ms, order is quite intelligible.
Owen [1960], 189n, rightly connects (a1) 1030a27 on ‘how one should speak’ with the ‘logical’ (i.e. dialectical)
remarks promised at 1029b13, and contrasts it with (b1) saying how things are, which belongs to philosophy. I
think he is wrong to identify this contrast with that between (a2) exhibiting the relation between beings by addition
and subtraction, 1030a33, and (b2) exhibiting it by focal connexion, a35. Aristotle says the difference between (a2)
and (b2) does not matter for his present purposes, 1030b4. But the difference between (a1) and (b1) matters a lot;
(b1) shows that essence primarily belongs to substance, whereas (a1) attributes it ‘logically’ (1030a25) to all sorts of
things, even to not-beings, 1030a21–7 (see Ross ad a27–8). This fact about essence and substance can be
expressed either by (b1) or, more correctly, by (b2); neither (b1) nor (b2) is intrinsically dialectical or philosophical,
but either may be defended on either sort of ground, and in this case Aristotle defends both on philosophical
grounds.
Woods [1974], 170f, argues that since not everything up to 1030a27 is merely logical discussion, 1030a27 does not
refer back to 1029b13. His premiss is true, but his inference is unwarranted. 1030a2 introduces philosophical
rather than logical considerations, and a21–7 reasserts the contrast between 1029b13ff and 1030a2ff.
On change see § 45–6.
In tode ti I take tode to be the demonstrative and ti to be the indeﬁnite article—hence ‘some this’ (cf. tode toionde in e.
g. 1033b23–4, where tode seems to be some deﬁnite particular and toionde the character it acquires). For other views
see Smith [1921], 19 (tode is the demonstrative and the ti refers to the kind), Preisewerk [1939], 85f (ti is the kind,
and tode the indeﬁnite individual within it), Owens, 386f.
At Catg. 3b10–13 numerical unity seems to be sufﬁcient for being a this, and some non-substances are numerically
one (1b6–7); hence some non-substances seem to be thises (see 3n19). Though ‘this’ is used to name the category
of substance (see n12 above), it is also applied to the form (which need not be a substance), in contrast to the
privation (GC 318b32; cf. Phys. 190b24–7). The reason for associating thisness with substance is perhaps similar to
the reason for associating what-it-is with substance; just as the ﬁrst category tells us what things basically are, it tells
us what the basic numerical unities are. On whether thises are particulars see 12n2–3 below.
Brunschwig [1979] agrees, 146, that this is the sort of predication Aristotle intends in 1041b11, but he denies,
149–52, for insufﬁcient reasons, that it is intended in 1049a18–b2. ‘The statue is wooden’ does not itself predicate

NOTES

37.
38.

39.
40.

41.

42.
43.

44.

559

form of matter; it expresses the fact that underlies the predication ‘The wood is a statue’ (where the ‘is’ indicates
constitution, not identity; see § 139 below).
The distinction between the two formulae helps to answer some of the questions raised by Ross, ii. 170, and
Burnyeat et al. [1979], 22f.
If x's being inseparable from y is sufﬁcient for y to be part of the account of x, then natural priority is sufﬁcient for
priority in account; if not, then these will be two distinct but related demands. However they are related, they
impose the same conditions that are imposed by the narrow predication-formula, but they do not necessarily agree
with the broad formula.
It is important to remember that Aristotle does not claim that the broad formula vindicates the claim of matter to
be substance; see n25 above, 12n30.
Though the argument of vii 5 is puzzling in places (see further Hare [1979]), the conclusion is fairly clear,
1031a1–14; it reinforces the conclusion of vii 4 that substances are the primary bearers of essences. Aristotle
reinforces this conclusion by appealing to such terms as ‘snub’, which differ from ‘white’ in implying a reference to
a deﬁnite type of subject (e.g. a nose), 1030b16–26. In their case also we have to recognize that the subject is
distinct from (e.g.) the snub and the bearer of the essence of the snub, and the snub turns out not to be a subject in
its own right (this is the point of the puzzle in 1030b28ff, which is solved only by recognizing this fact about the
snub; Top. 140b27–141a2, 181b37–182a6). Given the comparison in 1025b30–1026a6 between the snub and
natural substances, the claims about the snub raise a difﬁcult problem; how can natural substances escape the sort
of analysis that (in ch. 5) shows that compounds of form and matter are not substances in their own right? see §
138.
Since 1032a4–10 applies a previous solution to a problem about a particular, Aristotle probably does not suppose
that the previous solution was conﬁned to particulars (Ross, 177, goes too far in arguing that it must have been
conﬁned to universals); the points about primary and intrinsic beings did not assume any deﬁnite view about the
successful candidates for this status. But since he thinks the solution applies to a particular, he probably assumes
that a particular such as Socrates is a primary and intrinsic being. (The resolution of the previous problems in vii 6
resolves this one too.) See further n47.
On Woods's challenge to this argument see n47.
Aristotle does not actually say that if x is numerically one, the essence of x is numerically one also (i.e. it is
linguistically possible to interpret: ‘the substance of something numerically one is speciﬁcally one’). But if he does
not mean to say this, his argument is blatantly faulty, and the introduction of a substance (〉 essence) that is
numerically one is quite unexplained. The passage, therefore, strongly suggests that if Aristotle thinks particulars
have essences, he believes in essences that are particulars.
The ﬁrst part of vii 6 (to 1031b18) seeks to show that certain putative substances, Platonic Forms, must be
identical to their essences. Aristotle stipulates that Forms and the essences corresponding to them must be

560

NOTES

‘severed’, so that (a) what it is to be good is not present to the good itself, and (b) being good is not present to what
it is to be good, 1031b4–6. Here (a) follows from the assumption that Forms are not identical to their
corresponding essences. He can defend (b) from the initial assumption that if x is F, then the essence of F (EF) is
not identical to x; for if EF is also F, the essence of EF will not be identical to EF, and if the essence of EF is also
F, we face an inﬁnite regress of essences, which we prevent only by accepting (b). Aristotle appeals to some of the
argument underlying the Third Man regress, in Plato, Parm. 132a–c. He argues that the self-predication (i.e. being
instances of the property they correspond to) that Plato ascribes to Forms cannot be ascribed to essences, if we
accept the initial assumption (corresponding to the Non-identity assumption implicit in Plato's argument).
The ﬁrst bad result of severance is supposed to be that the Form of F (FF) is unknowable, because we know
something when we know its essence, 1031b6–7. Since EF, not FF, is the essence of F, we cannot know about F by
knowing FF, but only by knowing EF. Plato assumed that Forms, rather than sensibles, are objects of knowledge;
but now Forms turn out to be no better off than sensibles. The second bad result follows from (b), which implies
that the essence of being will not be a being; since there is no reason for one essence more than any other to be a
being, none of them will be a being, 1031b7–10. Since we must reject (b), and since (a) without (b) involves an
inﬁnite regress of essences, we must also reject (a).
Aristotle infers that things that are beings in themselves and primary, not one thing said of another, must be
identical to their essences, 1031b11–14. This point is meant to have been made clear by reference to Forms, since,
as the Platonist conceives them, they are primary and intrinsic beings; as Aristotle stresses, they are not what they
are by having sensible particulars participate in them, 1031b17–19. If Forms are not identical to their essences,
then we face the dilemma explored in the previous argument. The argument will work for any other subject; either
we allow the essence that is not identical to the subject to be another instance of the property and so face an
inﬁnite regress, or we prohibit this, and face impossible results about the essence.
45. Aristotle clariﬁes his position by rejecting an attempted reductio of the view that coincidental beings are identical to
their essences. The attempted reductio offers to derive an absurd conclusion from the view in question, as follows:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

The pale man is the same as the man.
The man is the same as his essence.
The pale man is the same as his essence.
Hence the two essences are the same, 1031a21–4.

Aristotle points out that (1) involves merely coincidental identity, from which the conclusion in (4) cannot be
derived, 1031a24–5. (1) is true because it is true that
(1a) The (particular) man who is coincidentally pale is the same as the man.
From (1a) we can validly derive (3) if it is understood as
(3a) The man who is coincidentally pale is the same as his essence.

NOTES

561

But (4) asserts not the identity of the man and his essence, but the identity of the two properties of being a pale
man and being a man; hence (4) does not follow from (3a). (4) does follow from
(3b) The pale man is the same as being a pale man.
But (3b) is inconsistent with (1); the subject of (3b) essentially has the property of being a pale man, and hence
cannot be identical to the man who is coincidentally pale.
As Aristotle remarks, ‘the pale’ signiﬁes two sorts of things: ‘for both the 〈subject〉 which has the coincident and
the coincident 〈are pale〉, so that in one way the thing is identical to its essence, and in one way not; for 〈being
pale〉 is not the same as the man or the pale man, but is the same as the affection 〈pale〉’, 1031b24–8 (OCT
and TO). We can use ‘the pale’ to refer to the man who is coincidentally pale; but he is not identical to what it is to
be pale (since he can persist without being pale). However, the pale (i.e. the essentially pale quality) is identical to
this affection, and so identical to what it is to be pale. Similarly, if ‘the pale’ refers to an essentially pale subject, it is
identical to what it is to be a pale thing. On ‘pale things’ see further 4n25. On the application of this doctrine to
compounds of form and matter see 11n37.
46. If 1030a11–12 meant ‘nothing, then, that is not a species of a genus has an essence’, it would immediately imply
that substances must be species. (See Ross, ii. 170, Lloyd [1981], 37, Code [1984], 15. Bonitz [1848], ii.308 is less
deﬁnite: ‘eas res quae a natura a genere ad species descendente sine ulla vel accidentis vel fortuiti admistione
deﬁnitae sunt’.) Nothing at all, however, has been said at this point to show that only species, as opposed to
particulars, could satisfy Aristotle's requirements for being primary. It is no less reasonable to take the remark to
mean that no essence is found outside species of genera, i.e. only members of basic natural kinds have essences.
(Non-substance species are excluded, as Alex. 472.9–11 suggests.) Alex. 472.10–14 sees the difﬁculty in speaking
of species as opposed to particulars, and insists that Aristotle is really speaking of particulars; but he relies
unnecessarily on nominalism to reach this conclusion (tauta de ta eidê epeidê ouden allo eisin ê ta kath'hekasta,
472.11–12).
47. Ross, ii. 176, suggests two other views about the conclusion of vii 6: (a) the intrinsic beings identical to their
essences are genera and species (cf. i. p. xcv); and (b) the essence of man, ‘to be a man’, is identical to each and
every man. Owen [1965], 209, and Woods [1974], 167ff also accept both (a) and (b) (as S. Marc Cohen remarks,
[1978], 82; see also Kung [1981], 228f). Woods argues for (b): ‘When we use a proper name like “Socrates” to pick
out an individual man, (i) what we pick out is always the form; though (ii) we pick it out as it occurs in a particular
piece of matter. (iii) The essence of Socrates is simply the form man, an essence which he shares with Callias’, 177
(reference-numbers added). Contrary to (i), however, ‘Socrates' seems to pick out something that, unlike the
species-form, undergoes Socrates' birth and death. If Woods agrees, and appeals to (ii), he casts doubt on (iii). On
1034a6–8, cited by Woods, 177, see 12n13. On the alleged connexions between Aristotle's views and the Third
Man regress see Fine [1982].
Owen claims that (b) helps to persuade Aristotle of (a)—'that the primary

562

NOTES

subjects of discourse cannot be individuals such as Socrates, who cannot be deﬁned, but species such as man’,
[1965], 209. If, however, (b) is true, Socrates turns out be deﬁnable after all, and (a) will be false. Cousin, [1935],
175n5, notices the conﬂict between (a) and (b) in Ross, and Owen and Woods do not answer his objection.
Owens, 352–7, assumes (relying, without warrant, on 1017b33–4) that the essence must be something of which
there is universal knowledge, and argues that since there is no universal knowledge of the particular sensible thing
‘the form is one with the thing, but not entirely so’, 356. Owens, therefore, cannot agree that Socrates is identical to
his essence, and cannot explain 1032a6–10 (cited without discussion, 357n). His assumption about the connexion
between essence and universal knowledge has no basis in vii 6. (He does not comment on the apparent particular
essence ‘being you’ in 1029b14–15.)
48. see § 64.

Chapter 11
1. see § 37.
2. see § 103.
3. Traits persisting through change in the subject are not required for a persisting subject in general, since an
absolutely unchanging subject needs no potentiality. (Cf. 3n35.) But it is reasonable to require them if the persisting
subject is to change.
4. The ordinary dialectic practised in Phys. i and GC i relies on intuitive beliefs about becoming and perishing; see §
37, 4n27. Different degrees and types of form are explored by Williams [1958], 302–12.
5. See Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, V. iv.84–6: (Hotspur) No, Percy, thou art dust, and food for—(Prince) For
worms, brave Percy. Fare thee well, great heart.
6. Aristotle does not report the Megarians' argument against unactualized potentialities. Perhaps they believe that (1)
possibility is necessary for potentiality, and (2) there are no unactualized possibilities (for the reasons given by
Aristotle's opponents in DI 18b9–25).
7. The Megarians might say that in denying that x is capable of (F at t), when x does not F at t, they are not denying
that x is capable of F. (See Burnyeat et al. [1984], 62f.) But, in Aristotle's view, what makes x capable of F is some
persistent potentiality of x. To be capable of (F at t) x needs this very same potentiality; hence if we deny that x is
capable of (F at t), we must say that x has lost the potentiality to F, and if x is capable of (F at some later time) x
must have recovered this potentiality. The apparently more moderate Megarian claim, together with Aristotle's
conception of potentiality, turns out to require the stronger claim.
8. Aristotle uses the adjective dunaton, cognate with dunamis (‘potentiality’) for both substances (hence meaning
‘capable’) and states of affairs (hence

NOTES

563

meaning ‘possible’, equivalent to endechomenon). Aristotle's distinctions between potentiality and possibility are fully
explored in Ide [1987], ch. 1.
9. Cf. Phys. 251b1–5. This construal of 1048a15–16 is supported by the ms. text. Ross and OCT delete poiein, making
the presence of the passive object necessary for the agent to have the potentiality to act on it. Hintikka [1977],
19–20, follows them, taking the passage as evidence for the view that all total possibilities are realized. If it is about
potentiality, it does not support Hintikka's thesis. See also Burnyeat et al. [1984], 120f, defending poiein, but still
conﬂating possibility and potentiality. Moline [1975], 247, translates the emended text, though his view, 253, seems
to ﬁt the ms. text better.
Support for the ms. text: (1) 1048a18–20: we need not add the clause ‘no external conditions preventing’ to the
statement of the potentiality, since the clause is already presupposed in the statement. (2) 1049a5–7: the wood is
potentially a house if someone's (i.e. the builder's) choice will make it a house, nothing external hindering. ‘Nothing
. . . ’ is part of the condition for actualizing the potentiality, not for having it; cf. 1049a13–14. (3) The paraphrase in
Alex. 577.26–7 is closer to the ms. text.
Contrary to Burnyeat et al. [1984], 121, poiein ou dunêsetai, 1048a16, may also refer to potentiality; it will then mean
‘if the agent will not act on the patient in the right circumstances, it lacks the potentiality to act on it’.
10. Potentiality therefore requires an ‘internal’ possibility (i.e. x's potentiality for F must make it possible for x to F if
we consider x's other characteristics). This in turn depends on some ‘standard’ external conditions (since some
internal possibilities are possibilities for interacting in particular ways with other things), which need not always be
the prevailing ones. (The role of standard conditions is noticed by Mourelatos [1967], 101, replying to Manicas
[1965], with some unwarranted inferences about the conﬂict between Aristotle's account and a counterfactual
analysis of powers. A plausible counterfactual analysis will also involve some reference to standard conditions.)
Amphibians stuck on dry land far from water still have the potentiality for swimming, and swimming is still
internally possible for them, though external conditions make it impossible for them to swim. (For the restrictions
imposed by external conditions see n11.) It follows that not every logically possible situation makes it equally
reasonable to attend to Aristotelian potentialities. If we have been trained as thatchers, but there are no houses left
for us to thatch, our potentiality as thatchers may not explain much.
11. To explain the relation of potentiality to possibility Aristotle adds 1047a20–6: ‘And so it is admissible for
〈something〉 to be capable of being something, but not to be it . . . Something is capable to which if there
belongs the actuality of that of which it is said to have the potentiality, nothing impossible will be the case.’
‘Capable’ (rather than ‘possible’) for dunaton is supported (i) by hôste, 1047a20, drawing a conclusion from his
previous remarks about the potentialities of substances, 1047a10–17; and (ii) by the fact that the subject of dunaton
is also the bearer of a dunamis, i.e. a substance with a potentiality. ‘Impossible’ in the last clause is justiﬁed by
1047b12, referring clearly to the impossibility of a state of affairs (to

564

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

NOTES

metreisthai), and relying on the deﬁnition in ix 3. On 1047b3–6 I agree with the view attributed to Kneale and Owen
by Hintikka [1973], 107f (and defended by McClelland [1981]), against Hintikka and Furth [1985], 134.
1047a26–8 expands the formula: ‘If something is capable of sitting, and sitting is admissible, then if sitting belongs
to this, nothing impossible will be the case.’ The antecedent treats the admissibility, i.e. possibility, of x's sitting as a
further condition beyond x's potentiality for sitting; this clause accommodates the reference to external conditions
in later remarks about potentiality, e.g. 1048a15–16 (see n9). If x has a potentiality for F, then x's actual F-ing in the
right external circumstances must result in no impossibility—i.e. it must be compatible with all the other
possibilities there are. This necessary condition for potentiality does not imply that the actualization of every
potentiality is possible.
Ross, ii. 245, Burnyeat et al. [1984], 67, Hintikka [1977], 22, Furth [1985], 133, take the passage to give an account
of possibility. In disagreeing with them I agree with part of Waitz's claim, [1844], i.398f that dunaton and
endechomenon are not interchangeable (accepted by Bonitz [1848], ii 387), though I do not think he is right about
every use of dunaton. The criticisms by Maier [1896], i. 193, Ross, and Le Blond [1939], 419, are too sweeping.
It is misleading, then, of Aristotle to suggest that I acquire the potentiality to F by previously exercising it; he
presumably means that I acquire the potentiality to F by doing some of the sorts of actions that I will also do once
I have acquired the potentiality to F. In EN 1105b5–12, 1144a13–20 he clariﬁes his view.
Kosman [1984], 132, stresses the importance of the distinction in 417a30ff, though without appeal to the
distinction between potentiality and possibility. The discussion in Burnyeat et al. [1984], 136f, comes closer to
making the distinction.
1050a5–16 stresses this explanatory role for actuality, discussed by Sellars [1967], 122f.
A doctor-turned-poisoner and a trained poisoner have different potentialities, since different activities explain their
acquisition of the traits they have acquired, even if they exercise these traits in the very same actions.
Similarly, the brickmaker need not know about houses if he is to make bricks competently (though the nature of
his craft is no doubt affected by facts about houses), and the bricks will be made in just the same way even if they
do not happen to be used for building a house; his potentiality is for making bricks.
‘Through it’, 1049a14, is explained by ‘through its own origin’, a15–16. On the body as potentially alive see § 152.
GA 735a4–8 explains that the seed from which a human being develops potentially has a human soul; but
735a9–11 appeals to the distinction between remote and proximate potentialities; the embryo already has some of
the relevant organs, and has a proximate potentiality to grow, 735a12–26, into the full-grown body that has the
more proximate potentiality for the activities of the adult F.

NOTES

565

19. Aristotle adds to ix 6 a further illustration of the ways in which potentiality and actuality can be detached from
change. Not all actualities are changes; in fact change is merely an incomplete actuality, and the most complete
actualities are not changes, 1048b18–23. A change is incomplete and does not have its end within itself, but an
actuality is complete and self-contained, b21–2. In describing complete actualities we can apply both present-tense
and perfect-tense verbs whenever we can apply either, b23–7 (since the perfect tense indicates present
completeness). With a change, however, the perfect tense is inappropriate at times when the present tense is
appropriate, because changes are not complete until they are over, b28–34. The importance of this aspect of
changes is especially stressed by Kosman [1984], 124–9 and [1969]. Among the most helpful earlier discussions of
the contrast between change and actuality are Ackrill [1965] and Penner [1970], esp. 405–22.
This contrast is relevant to the relation of potentiality to form and matter. When we say that F is potentially G, we
need not be referring to any tendency of the subject to change from F to G. Nor need G itself be any sort of
change or process. The sorts of actualities that Aristotle identiﬁes with forms are described in terms that make
them complete actualities rather than changes. ‘Is a statue’, ‘is alive’, ‘is human’, ‘is a perceiver’, and so on all satisfy
the present-and-perfect test.
20. Hartman objects, [1977] 98, that ‘Aristotle does not need both the conception of person and that of human body’.
He thinks Aristotle is wrong to treat the body as matter at all.
21. Aristotle does not want the cause of some event or change, but the cause of being, 1041a31–2. If this question has
a non-trivial answer it must be the question ‘Why is x x?’, understood in the non-trivial way; ‘Why is x-qua-F also
x-qua-G?’, e.g. ‘Why is this (i.e. bricks and mortar) this (i.e. a house)?’. The answer to this question states the form
and the substance.
22. In vii 7–9 Aristotle describes production by craft; the house with matter comes into existence from the matter and
from ‘the house without matter’, 1032b11–12, also called ‘the form in the soul’, 1032b1 (the house is conceived in
the craftsman's soul, though not embodied in any matter there; see 14n3). It is not a particular house, since a
particular house must be embodied in matter. But it is not clearly a universal either. For what is needed for this
house to come to be is the particular instance of a conception of a house; the universal house, and the universal
conception of a house, will not explain the coming-to-be of this particular house. It is reasonable to regard the
form that is an element of becoming as a particular.
Admittedly, Aristotle remarks that the form does not come to be, 1033a31–b16. But he argues only that some
form must precede each becoming of an informed thing (for if the form has to be produced, it must also be
produced from form and matter, hence from another form which must also be produced, and so on to inﬁnity,
1033b3–5). It does not follow that every form must always have existed. Rejection of an inﬁnite regress is
therefore consistent with the belief there are particular non-everlasting forms. Heinaman [1979], 252–7 argues this
point well. Contrast Haring

566

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

NOTES

[1956], 325, 330, Code [1984], 16, Ross, ii. 188 (more cautious, believing in the everlastingness of substantial
forms, but not inferring it from this passage by itself), Owens, 360. Owens's appeal to 999b5–16 actually tells
against him; the absence of any claim about everlastingness and absolute ingenerability from vii 7–9 marks a
striking contrast with iii, and suggests that Aristotle deliberately fails to rule out particular forms.
Just as in production the form is the particular in the soul of the producer, in natural generation the form involved
seems to be the one peculiar to the progenitor (cf. 1070a4, 1071a19, GA 767b29). It is Peleus' form, not the
universal human form, that is part of the process resulting in the coming-to-be of Achilles.
In speaking of matter, I refer to sensible matter, not to the intelligible matter that is relevant to mathematical
objects. Some questions about it are raised by Ross. ii 199.
Lloyd [1970] 524, relies on 1035a7–9 to argue that ‘the form of x’ and ‘the matter of x’ should be understood as ‘x
qua form’ and ‘x qua matter’, so that ‘both expressions are about the composite’. The same view underlies the
claims of Wiggins [1967], 48 (criticized by Ackrill [1972a], 119–22, and not reappearing in Wiggins [1980]),
Charlton [1970], 72f (criticized by Harter [1975], 12; I think Charlton is probably wrong about Phys. i—see §
48–9—but right about the Met.).
Anscombe [1961], 53, takes hekaston, 1035a8, to extend, e.g., to lumps of matter, and to imply that we must apply a
form to them in speaking of them. I think hekaston might extend only to such things as statues; it need not imply a
general claim about the impossibility of speaking of matter in its own right.
It follows that 1035b27–8 need not be distinguishing the species horse (a compound) from the species form. (See
Loux [1979], 3, 14; Driscoll [1981], 136; Code [1984], 15.) For Aristotle must also identify the species form with
(one sort of) compound if he is to distinguish the (materiate) essence of horse from the (immateriate) essence of
circle, and must identify the species with (one sort of) form if he is to distinguish it from bronze ball. No difference
emerges between species and species form.
I rely on Sellars's explanation of how the form includes matter, in [1957], 135; ‘the form . . . is . . . these qualities
determined in reference to substance (i.e. as criterion qualities for a thing kind name) in some appropriate material or
other. Thus Aristotle can say that the form of this shoe is, in a certain sense, the shoe itself.’ The different types of
form, matter, and compound are carefully examined in Whiting [1984], chs. 3–4.
Heinaman [1979] (see also Harter [1975]), argues that Aristotle (e.g. 1036b21ff) allows deﬁnitions of the
compound, but not of the form, to include matter. Heinaman's view (a) makes it hard to distinguish circles, men,
and bronze balls in the way Aristotle wants to (since Heinaman's view will make the immaterial form the essence
of all of them); and (b) becomes less attractive once we admit different types of matter. See further § 134.
Falstaff, unlike Hotspur (see n5 above) grasps the point about homonymy: ‘ . . . to die, is to be a counterfeit; for he
is but the counterfeit of a man, who hath not the life of a man’ (Henry IV Part I, V.iv.116–18).

NOTES

567

28. The passage is quoted at § 122.
29. On proximate and remote matter see Loux [1979], 10 (who identiﬁes proximate matter with any non-prime
matter); Sheldon Cohen [1984], 188–94; Owen [1978], 287f (citing GA 741a10–11, 734b24–7, 726b22–4); Ackrill
[1972a], 69f (whose arguments against Aristotle apply to proximate matter; his arguments at 73f to show that
remote matter cannot be the matter of an animal show only that it cannot be the proximate matter); Kosman
[1984]. 143 (whose claim that ‘there is no thing which is the matter of a human being’ applies only to proximate
matter; he does not consider remote matter).
In GC 321b19–22 (ﬂesh as matter v. ﬂesh as form), Metr. 389b28–390a19 (different material parts satisfying the
homonymy principle to different degrees) Aristotle draws distinctions related to, though not quite the same as, the
one between proximate and remote matter.
30. The passage is quoted and discussed at § 133.
31. Aristotle appeals less readily to the possibility of different material compositions than do modern philosophers
who want to distinguish functional from compositional properties. (The strategy of such arguments from
‘plasticity’ is summarized by Boyd [1980], 87–91.) In fact he is more often impressed by the fact that only one sort
of stuff is actually suitable for the function, Phys. 200a30–b8. But 1036a30–b3 refers to the right sort of possibility.
32. I have quoted selectively from Locke, to bring out his implicit conditions for the persistence of the same living
body. He does not state explicit conditions; but he clearly thinks it lasts as long as, and no longer than, the creature
whose body it is. He contrasts it with a mass of matter, which has to retain all the same material parts to be the
same mass, 27.4.
33. On 1043b1–4 see Ackrill [1972a], 68, Loux [1979], 4, who both rely heavily on the distinction Aristotle alludes to,
but do not say why Aristotle should think it so unimportant for his present purposes. The distinction between
form and compound is unimportant, as Aristotle says, only for sensible substances. If non-sensible substances do
not essentially include matter, their forms are not the essences of formal compounds, but they are immateriate
forms; if they were embodied in matter, it would be very important to distinguish the compound from the form.
34. On life histories see Wiggins [1980], 30–5. If proximate matter is distinguished from remote, then Hartman's
suggestion, [1977], 99, that Aristotle thinks form and matter are ‘accidentally identical’ (a ‘weaker sense’ of
‘identity’ (103) than ‘full’ (75) or ‘perfect’ (76) identity, and holding between Socrates and the musical man)
becomes less attractive, since a ‘weak sense’ of identity seems to ﬁt neither type of matter (the proximate matter is
fully identical to the form, and the remote matter is not identical to it at all). See also n37 below. On the identity of
form, matter, and compound see 13n21.
35. In 1035a23 I follow Ross, and retain an mê ê(i) tou suneilêmmenou (bracketed as a gloss in OCT), taking to
sumeilêmmenon to be, e.g., the statue as material compound, as opposed to the statue as form (intended in tôn d'ou dei
eneinai).

568

NOTES

36. See 10n45.
37. In saying that Socrates and the musical are coincidentally one, 1037b6–7, Aristotle means that Socrates is identical
to the thing that is coincidentally musical (i.e. Socrates) because it is a coincident of Socrates to be musical.
‘Coincidentally’ does not modify or weaken the claim about identity, but gives the grounds for claiming (strict, full)
identity. (Contrast Hartman 1977], 99, also discussed in n34 above.) If, however, ‘the musical’ signiﬁes the
compound that is essentially musical, then Socrates is not identical to it at all, since he can exist without it.
Our previous explanation of Aristotle's claim that coincidental compounds (man and musical) are not identical to
‘their’ essences also explains the corresponding claim about material compounds. For if we take man to be a
material compound, his persistence depends on the persistence of the form (〉 the formal compound), but the
converse does not hold; hence the essence of the material compound depends on the essence of something other
than it (the form). 1037b5 (retaining the ms. text, oude, supported by Ascl. 422.28–32, which contrasts compounds
with coincidental unities) implies that the material compound is not a coincidental unity, as Socrates and the
musical are. Perhaps (cf. 1030b16–23) Aristotle means that the form and the remote matter are more closely
connected, as snubness is to nose; a form needs some remote matter or other (just as a nose must be either snub
or aquiline or . . . ), though it need not have matter of just this type.
38. It is useful to see how vii 12 completes the argument of 10–11, and shows why formal compounds are identical to
their essences, not coincidental unities. In ch. 12 Aristotle wants to show that genus, differentia, and species
together constitute one natural kind, and not a coincidental combination in which the genus is the basic subject,
and the differentia and species are coincidents of it, as musicality is a coincident of man. The difference is that
whereas a particular man who at one time is musical can persist even if he ceases to be musical, a particular animal
who at one time is a man cannot persist if he ceases to be a man. Hence the genus is not a more basic subject than
the species, and the species is a unity, 1037b21–3. The universal deﬁned in the account of the species is a single
universal, not a coincidental combination, because the this, i.e. the particular instance of the universal (see
10n34–5) is a unity, 1037b24–7, not spoken of by one thing being said of another, 1030a10–11, and therefore
belonging to a species of a genus, 1030a11–14.
This conclusion is relevant to the argument of 10–11. For an exactly parallel argument will show why the formal
compound universal is a genuine unity and not a mere coincidental combination, and why the particular
instantiating the compound universal is a genuine unity and not a mere coincidental combination (of matter as the
more basic subject and form as the coincident). Aristotle sees the connexion between the problem about genus
and species and the problem about matter and form, since he compares genus and species to matter and form,
1024b8–9, 1038a5–8, 1043b28–32, 1045a33–5, 1058a23–4. In this comparison he shows that the problems about
genuine unities apply directly to the substances that are his main concern in Book vii.

NOTES

569

39. In 1036b28 I read aisthêtikon for the ms. aisthêton. The other claims follow naturally from an animal's being capable
of perception (given Aristotle's teleological views about psychic faculties; see § 159), but not from its being
perceptible. Most commentators assume that aisthêton simply reﬂects the fact that the object is material (cf.
1026a2–3; Alex. 514.22). But then (as Ross remarks) echontôn pôs becomes irrelevant. But aisthêtikon, referring to the
deﬁnition of an animal, makes the following remarks relevant (as Ascl. 420.25 and Aquinas in Met. 1519 (‘animal
enim discernitur a non animali sensu et motu’), show in their paraphrases, though both read aisthêton). For ‘just any
condition’, pantôs, 1036b30, cf. ho pantôs echôn daktulos, 1035b24.
40. See 14n3.
41. Since no similar explanatory relation holds between geometrical properties objects and their sensible matter, having
sensible matter is not essential to them; circularity is not an actuality of sensible material bodies as such, even if
particular circles can exist only in material bodies. Young Socrates overlooks this distinction. Nussbaum [1984],
201, rightly argues from 1036b26ff to show that the functional organization of a natural substance is necessarily
enmattered. She does not explain why Aristotle should think the connexion with matter is stronger in this case than
with mathematical objects.

Chapter 12
1. Sellars [1957] has introduced particular forms into recent discussion. For earlier discussion see Cousin [1935], 172,
who cites 1022a25–9, 1029b14, 1037a7–10, 1071a28; Ross [1923], 170n3; Cherniss [1944], 506, who adds 1032a8.
The main putative evidence that has been adduced is as follows: (i) A form is a this, and hence a particular (Sellars).
(ii) A particular form is needed as the essence of a particular substance (Hartman [1977], 62). (iii) 1070a21–6,
1071a1–3, 20–9, 1075b35 on particular causes (Albritton [1957]). (iv) 1035a7–9, b14–24, 27–31, 1036a16–17,
24–5, 1037a5–10, 27–33, 1043b2–4 on souls (Albritton). (v) Catg. 1a27–9, Met. 1087a19–20, Phys. 228a6–9 on
particular non-substances (Lloyd [1981], 24). (vi) 1029b23–6, 1043b15, 1044b21–6 (cf. 1002a30, 1026b22–4,
1027a29–32, 1033b17, 1070a1–4); forms that are destructible without being destroyed. (vii) Phys. i and v, Met. xii
4–5 imply that the form is a principle of change, and principles of change must be particulars, so that the form
must be particular (Harter [1975], 11–15). (viii) Forms are perishable, 1060a21–3, Phys. 192b1–2, 246b12–16, GA
731b31–5 (cf. GC 328a27–8, 338b14–17, Met. 1059a6–7, 1071a21–6, DC 306a9–11) (Heinaman [1979], 268f). (ix)
The perishability of souls, 1070a24–6, DA 408a24–6, 413a3–7, b24–9, 430a24–5, PN 465a27–30, 479a7–9, 22,
GA 736b21–4 (Heinaman).
Among these arguments I am persuaded by (i)–(iv), (vii), and (ix), and regard (v), (vi), and (viii) as indecisive. (On
(i) see n2–3 below. On (v); the evidence refers to non-substances. On (vi); as Lloyd himself notices, 54, if

570

NOTES

the existence of the universal depends on a plurality of instances, some universals will be capable of ceasing to exist
(see n46 below)).
Albritton presents some of the major objections to particular forms: (1) The evidence secures at most particular
forms for living substances. (2) In calling the form a this Aristotle need not imply that it is a particular. (3) In
1039b25 the essence of this house cannot be a particular form, since it is generated and destroyed. (4) The
arguments in vii 13 do not require Aristotle to deny that universals are substances. Other objections: (5) Loux
[1979], 13; since the form is predicated (e.g. 1049a35), it must be a universal. (6) He suggests that the form is a this
only in so far as it makes something a this. (See DA 412a8–9, n10 below, Ross, i.310, Lacey [1965], 66.) (7) Code
[1984], 13–16; particular forms cannot be essences, since essences are deﬁnable (and hence universal) in a way
particular forms cannot be. For further discussion see Lewis [1984].
In reply to these objections: (a) (1) does not count against the view that every substance has a particular form, if
Aristotle himself doubts (see Albritton [1957], 704n1) if there are any inanimate substances, 1032a18–19, 1034a4,
1041b28–30, 1043b19–23, 1040b5–16, 1043a2–7. (b) On (2), (4)–(5), see n3, 35–7 below. (c) (3) is answerable if the
essence of this house is a particular formal compound. (d) Against (6) see Cherniss [1944], 352n, Lloyd [1981], 39.
If there is other good evidence that the form is itself a this and a particular, (6) is too weak an interpretation. (e) (7)
is not so powerful if essences may be instances of essential properties, not necessarily the properties themselves;
see § 117.
2. Further reasons (cf. 10n34–5) for thinking Aristotle takes a this to be a particular: (a) It is clear in the Catg. that
thisness implies particularity (see 3n19). (b) Top. 178b38–9 says that nothing common (sc. to more than one thing)
is a this, and the this is clearly the particular (178b37, kath'hekaston) just referred to (cf. 1014a22). This argument, to
expose the Platonist mistake in treating a such as a this, recurs in Met. 1039a1–2. (On Driscoll's discussion of these
passages see n40.) (c) Met. vii 1 connects thisness with substance, identiﬁed with the deﬁnite particular subject,
1028a27. At this stage Aristotle has no doubt that a this and a deﬁnite subject is a particular. (d) Since his appeal to
thisness in 1029a28 is part of his discussion of substance as subject, he should still be talking about particulars.
3. Reasons for denying that thises must be particulars (see Owens, 389f): (a) Aristotle says the form is a this that is
predicated of matter, 1049a35–6; see Loux [1979], 13, Driscoll [1981], 136n. (b) Albritton [1957], 701f, argues that
universals may be thises from 1042a29, 1049a35–6, 1070a14–17. (c) Aristotle is alleged to contrast the this with the
particular, in contexts where he says the form is a this; see 1017b24–6, 1042a26–31, 1070a9–15, Cherniss [1944],
352.
Replies: (a) While nothing predicated of a plurality is a this, a particular form is predicated of just one subject, and so
is not a universal. (b) 1070a14–17 may well refer to a particular form in the soul of the craftsman (as in vii 7–9; see
11n22). 1042a29 readily applies to the particular form, since this is separable in account. (c) These passages
mention thisness and particularity separately, but do not imply that a this cannot or need not be a particular.

NOTES

571

4. I follow Sellars (see 11n26) in identifying a particular form with a formal compound. Albritton, however, assumes
that it must be ‘an abstract particular . . . which . . . would not be a material thing’, [1957], 703; and Harter [1975]
and Heinaman [1979] agree in taking the form to be immaterial. I think the immaterialist views have difﬁculty with
1037a1–2. Whiting [1984], chs. 1–2, argues convincingly that particular forms are formal compounds.
5. Anscombe [1961], 53f, takes 1035b27–31 to refer to Platonic Forms; contrast Furth [1985], 120. We remove the
difﬁculty in supposing that Aristotle means to refer (as Ross, 199, rightly assumes) to his own universal forms, if
we take him to intend the formal compound. Chen's argument, [1964], 56f, that the universal compound is an
undesirable intruder into Aristotle's ontology, loses its force if we distinguish formal from material compounds.
6. On 1035b31–1036a8 see Owens, 360. His conclusion (that the per se being identiﬁed with its essence is the form
without matter, which is ‘the same in all its singulars’) would be justiﬁed if we could fairly assume that Aristotle
refers to only one type of form and one type of compound.
7. On 1043a37–b1 see § 132. In 1037a9 I follow the ms. text, kai sôma tode; Ross and OCT insert to after kai, yielding
‘if Socrates is unconditionally this soul and this body’ (which will also, on my view, introduce the formal
compound). The ms. reading implies the identiﬁcation of the soul (the materiate form) with the body (the
proximate matter), and therefore justiﬁes Aristotle's conclusion that Socrates is the (formal) compound. Here, as in
1036a16–25, 1043a29–b4, Aristotle does not seem to decide if the soul (universal or particular) is identical to the
animal or not; but his indecision is reasonable, since we will be talking about the same thing both times.
Lloyd's appeal to 1036b24–30 to show that Aristotle could not identify Socrates with his soul ([1981], 38) fails,
once we distinguish the formal from the material compound. The same distinction shows why we need not follow
Hartman [1977], 69f, in denying (against dêlon, 1037a5) that the universal man is meant to be a compound of soul
and body.
8. I am assuming that persistence is consistent with the eventual replacement of all the original remote matter.
Whether such persistence is also sufﬁcient for identity depends on questions about such puzzles as the Ship of
Theseus, on which see Wiggins [1980], 90–9. Wiggins's discussion suggests reasons why Aristotle might doubt
whether anything besides a natural substance is a substance; see 1041b28–31, 1043b21–3. Perhaps he believes that
because artifacts do not replace their own matter, and need to have distinguishable bits replaced, they are more like
heaps of constituents. These points suggest that organisms are better wholes, and hence are basic subjects to a
fuller extent, than artifacts are; it does not follow that there is no important difference between artifacts and mere
heaps or that artifacts are not substances to a high degree. Most of what is true about the irreducibility of genuine
substances to aggregates of their parts is true about artifacts as well. Moreover, on this view, a normal artifact fails
to be a substance because of its relation to its parts, not because it is an artifact. If an

572

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

NOTES

artifact nourished and maintained itself as an organism does, it is not clear why Aristotle should deny that it is an
organism, and hence a substance.
Albritton (see n1 above) and Code [1984], 17n, argue that since (1) the essence of this house, 1039b24–5, is
generable and destructible, and (2) all such things have matter, (3) the essence of this house must have matter; but
since (4) whatever has matter cannot be a form, it follows that (5) the essence of this house cannot be a particular
form. Heinaman [1979], 253n, agrees, but argues that ‘being house’ refers to a particular form (not, as Albritton,
Code, and I suppose, the universal) and ‘being this house’ to a particular composite (cf. DC 278a8–10). A believer
in formal compounds should reject (4).
At 412a7 I read kath'hauto men; some mss. omit the men. The men is justiﬁed, since it receives the equivalent of its
answering de in kath' hên êdê, a8. (Hicks [1907], 305, does not quite do it justice in calling it a men solitarium.) The
matter as such is not a this, but it is a this in so far as it is a form. I take hulê to be the subject of legetai, following
Alex. Quaest. ii 24 (p. 75.3–16, cited by Rodier [1900], ii. 165f), who makes it clear that the claim is true of
proximate matter; contrast Hicks, 306.
I am unsure whether 1042a32–b8 refers (a) to proximate, or (b) to remote matter. If the hupokeimenon hôs kata
sterêsin of 1042b3 is the matter that precedes the existence of a natural organism, (b) is required—and that would be
the normal use of kata sterêsin. But (a) is tenable if this subject is the subject that comes into being and passes away;
in that case kata sterêsin will refer to the subject as a potential this as opposed to the actual this that is the form.
On the relation between form, matter, and compound see further § 152. The particular formal sensible
compound, as such, is separable unconditionally, whereas the particular sensible form, as such, is separable in
account; for the form states the deﬁnition, and since the deﬁnition must be true of a formal compound, and the
formal compound is separable, the form will also turn out to be unconditionally separable. (Aristotle does not
exclude unconditional separability from form; contrast the way he excludes being actually a this from matter as
such, 1042a27–8.) In a31 Aristotle reminds us that not all forms have to be sensible formal compounds; those that
do not include sensible proximate matter are not subject to becoming and destruction—the ones that are subject
to them are formal compounds.
The formal compound (and therefore the form qua formal compound) is separable unconditionally (and therefore
meets the condition in 1028a33–4; see § 108) in so far as it depends on no particular bit of remote matter;
separability is consistent with dependence on some bit of remote matter or other.
1034a5–8 does not imply either (a) that Aristotle takes Socrates and Callias to be identical to the species form Man
(as Woods argues, [1974], 177); or (b) that ‘the formal component of a hylomorphic composite is general’ (Code
[1984], 16). Against (a): to say they are the same in respect of their species form is not to say they are identical to it.
Against (b): if Aristotle recognizes particular forms, the eidos mentioned here will be the species

NOTES

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

573

form. The claim that the species form is atomon need not preclude further determination; it may simply preclude
further division into species. See n17.
Claims about the difference between conspeciﬁc particulars raise questions about the role of form and matter in
individuation; see Owens, 394n77, Cousin [1935], 176, Cherniss [1944], 506, Anscombe [1953], Lloyd [1970],
Charlton [1972], Marc Cohen [1984], Whiting [1986]. A particular form seems to provide both a principle of unity
(what makes something a single thing rather than a collection) and a principle of distinctness (what makes two
things two rather than one). (For these two principles see Lloyd, 519, Popper [1953], 100f, Whiting, 362.) Two
particular forms of penny are needed to explain why there are two pennies rather than four (as there would be if
we were counting penny-halves). 1040a28ff and DC i 9 (cited by Cohen on behalf of matter; see § 141) show that
Aristotle takes matter to be necessary for a particular (since it provides the non-qualitative feature that makes it not
logically repeatable); but they do not refute the claim that form is also necessary for distinguishing one particular
from another.
This argument is rather abbreviated. For it is not essential to Socrates that he should be distinct from Callias in
particular, if that is taken to imply the existence of Callias—Socrates could have existed even if Callias had not. But
it is essential to him that he should have some features distinguishing him from other conspeciﬁc particulars,
whatever they are.
This question about identity and difference is about what the difference between two conspeciﬁc individuals
consists in, not about how we can recognize the difference when it is present (see further Woods [1965]). An
answer to it should show (i) what is essential to each subject; (ii) how they differ from each other at the same time
(the synchronic question); (iii) what constitutes the persistence of one, as opposed to the persistence of the other
(the diachronic question). Difference in remote matter, e.g., seems to answer the synchronic question; the two
coins, or Socrates and Callias, are two in so far as they now occupy two bits of remote matter. But it does not
answer the diachronic question very well.
Aristotle would have to believe that particular forms differ only numerically (as, e.g., two coins made from the
same die, from bronze of just the same composition, with the very same shape and so on, will be distinct simply in
so far as they are constituted by two bits of bronze), if he believed that every qualitative difference between them
would imply a difference in species; for he insists that particular compounds differ not in species but because of
their matter, 1058a37–b12. He believes, however, that females and males in a species differ qualitatively without
differing in species, 1058a29–36; analogously, there is no reason why qualitative differences between particular
forms should imply distinct species. This point removes the objections to qualitatively distinct particular forms
raised by Lloyd [1970], 521f (though cf. [1981] 27), Hartman [1977], 63f, Albritton [1957], 700. Neglect of the
point infects Aquinas's discussion of angels, ST 1a, q.50, a4, in corp.
Hence we do not explain the identity of the particular form if we simply

574

19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.

NOTES

appeal to the proximate matter; for the identity of the proximate matter is not explicable independently of the
identity of the particular form.
Alternatively, we might suggest that Socrates and Callias differ simply in so far as they have different histories, and
that no qualitative (i.e. not purely historical) distinguishing properties are essential to their particular forms. On this
view, however, Socrates requires only the persistence of human functions in a bit of proximate matter, and no
qualitative changes could cause Socrates to perish if human functions continue. Such a view does not provide clear
conditions for the persistence of the proximate matter. If Socrates and Callias exchange most of their remote
matter, which bit is Socrates' proximate matter? Socrates' previous qualities cannot distinguish them, since (on this
view) these are inessential to the form. But the remote matter cannot distinguish them either, since it is not the
same as the proximate matter. If persistence of (not merely historical) qualities is required, then, even if human
functions are continuous, Socrates' functions may not persist; if they do not, then Socrates has perished and this
particular bit of proximate matter has perished too.
1070a9–14, taken by itself, does not rule out the view that the compound is a particular, and the form is a this but
not a particular. But 1071a19–24 implies that thises (e.g. this letter B) are particulars as opposed to universals, and
so implies that if a form is a this it is a particular.
In 767b34 I read kai gar to ginomenon, with the OCT; Peck [1953] omits the gar.
I use ‘parent’ rather than ‘father’, since the claim is defensible even if Aristotle is wrong to believe that only the
male transmits form.
See 5n9.
On GC 321b25–8 see Anscombe [1961], 55f, Hartman [1977], 60 (who rightly takes it to be evidence for particular
forms), Marc Cohen [1984], 63f. Cohen suggests that Aristotle may be considering the persistence of a kind. But
only a persisting particular can grow (as opposed to being replaced by a larger conspeciﬁc particular), and Aristotle
thinks the form grows.
A particular form must be more than a set of repeatable properties, since Aristotle rejects that conception of a
particular (see § 141). The spatio-temporal characteristics that make the particular unique and unrepeatable must
also be part of the particular form. We have argued not that the qualitative characteristics of the particular form are
all it is, but only that they are essential to it, and especially to the explanatory role of form as actuality. See §§ 193,
212.
Aristotle cannot intend separability and thisness to rule out matter as substance. (a) He mentions form, matter, and
compound as three types of substance, 1029a30–3. (b) He continues to maintain that matter is substance,
1035a1–2, 1038b4–6, 1042a26–b3, b9–11, 1049a34–6, DA 412a6–7. (c) He also claims that matter is not a this,
1042a27–8, 1049a24–36, or not in itself a this, DA 412a7–8, though it is potentially a this.
It follows that thisness and separability cannot simply be necessary conditions for substance; matter fails them and
yet counts as a substance.

NOTES

27.

28.
29.
30.

31.

575

Nor can they be merely sufﬁcient, since that would not make form and compound substance more than matter is.
See 10n24.
Since the water from the same well is one only in kind, not in number, Top. 103a14–23, Aristotle implies that a
particular pool of water is only a collection, not a numerically one individual. Similarly, logs and bodies will also be
mere collections, not numerical unities, unless they are something more than their similar parts. On collections see
further Cartwright [1970].
Book x adds this condition to the account of unity in 1015b36–1016a9 (1016a7–9 comes closest to it).
On numerical unity and indivisibility see 3n19, 4nn32–4.
Even if heaps of matter cannot be thises, might their constituents be thises? (a) If some non-compositional
property determines the identity and persistence of the constituents, each of them will then be a formal unity,
undermining the claim that matter is the only substance. (b) But if each constituent is itself a heap, its identity and
persistence will depend on some more basic constituents. If this regress cannot be stopped, matter cannot be a this,
and therefore cannot be a primary subject.
Democritean atomism, as Aristotle understands it, claims that the atom is a substance and a this. See Simp. in DC
295.5 (reading tô(i) tô(i)de, following Bekker [1831], 1514b12), 1039a8–11, GC 325a32–6 (on unity), DC 303a5–10,
with Stocks in TO ad loc. Since points cannot constitute an extended body, GC 316a23–9, the atom must be
physically indivisible, and essentially constituted of these parts, but logically divisible. Since the parts depend on the
whole, the atom avoids objection (b). But for the same reason, the account of the parts seems to depend on their
relation to the whole, and the whole cannot, therefore, be deﬁned simply by reference to its parts. It therefore
seems to be open to objection (a).
This argument implies that even elementary stuffs have some sort of form (as 1042b11–1043a7 suggests—though
1043a4–7 insists that this sort of form does not make a genuine substance, and the demand for genuine unities
explains why not). A molecule of water, e.g., must have not only a deﬁnite type of matter—hydrogen and
oxygen—but also these constituents in the ratio 2 : 1. If something's identity depends on any formal conditions, we
can distinguish these conditions from the subject of which they are predicated, and therefore we still have not
found a subject that is predicated of nothing else, in the sense required by the broad predication-formula. Aristotle
assures us that nothing except matter could satisfy the broad formula. His later argument shows that in fact that
matter does not satisfy it. See 10n25.
Different views on why matter is not a this:

(1) My account is closest to Sellars's suggestion, [1957], 134, and [1963], that primary ‘thing kind expressions’ are
conﬁned to ‘direct purpose servers’, to teleologically ordered things; and I agree with Kung's appeal, [1978],
156f, to the degree of unity found in living organisms. Both Sellars and Kung provide an incomplete
explanation, however, until we show how Aristotle's general views about thises justify the preferences for unity
and for teleologically ordered things; these

576

NOTES

preferences do not follow trivially from the sense of ‘this’ (no such preference, e.g., seems to underlie the
contrast between this and such).
(2) Sokolowski [1970], 282f, Hartman [1977], 31f, rely on the alleged arbitrary and conventional character of the
application of ‘lump of bronze’, ‘bucketful of water’, and so on, and their conditions for individuation and
reidentiﬁcation. I doubt if the relevant sort of arbitrariness is special to bits of matter. For it is not arbitrary that
this is a bucketful of water etc., and there may be good reason for counting bucketfuls rather than drops; useful
conditions for identity need not give a deﬁnite answer in every conceivable case.
(3) Owen [1978], 288, argues from vii 3 and vii 16 (citing 1033a2, 1034a6, 1041b5–7) that only prime matter fails to
be a this (though he adds reservations about non-prime matter). His view conﬂicts with the examples in vii 16,
and with 1042a27, where matter is recognized as a substance but as only potentially a this.
(4) Chappell [1970] and [1973] (effectively criticized by Cartwright [1972] and by Kung [1978], 146f), suggests that
Aristotle refers to the distinction between stuff (referred to as e.g. ‘bronze’) and things (referred to as e.g. ‘this
lump of bronze’). But vii 16 makes it clear that lumps are not (primary) substances, and therefore implies that
they are not thises.
32. This view explains the claim that no substance is composed of substances, 1041a4–5 (cf 1039a3–14). Aristotle
does not mean to deny that (in one sense) Socrates is composed of his remote matter, or that bits of it are
substances of some sort. He means to deny that the remote matter or any bit of it is a more basic substance that
determines the identity of Socrates. On the other hand, the parts of Socrates' proximate matter are not substances.
The distinction between remote and proximate matter solves the puzzle of 1039a14–23.
33. In 1038b5 tode ti might be the form (Cousin [1933], 327) or the compound (Ross, ii. 164, Owens, 334). I take it to
be the form (which is also the formal compound), and take the matter to be the proximate matter (since the form
is identiﬁed with the actuality, and the grounds for the identiﬁcation are partly anticipated in 1035b16–22,
1036b28–32, which attribute the potentiality to the proximate matter).
34. The ‘F is G-en’ test is familiar from Phys. 245b9–246a1; cf. 1033a16–22. But only ix 7 explains it by reference to
potentiality. On Brunschwig's discussion see 10n36.
35. Woods [1967], 229 (criticized by Lesher [1971], Driscoll [1981], 134) argues that Aristotle attacks things spoken of
universally, katholou legomena, and that he counts species as universals, but not spoken of universally, so that the
attack is conﬁned to genera. The distinction Woods relies on is dubious. (1) 1035b27–31 denies that universals are
substances. (2) Woods renders 1038b11 not as I have (agreeing with Code [1978], 66), but as ‘for what is spoken of
universally is what is of a nature to belong to a plurality’. But even with this translation ‘for. . . ’ seems to cover
man, horse, etc. (3)

NOTES

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

577

Hence Aristotle reverts to ‘universal’, 1038b11, 16, not conﬁning himself to ‘spoken of universally’.
‘Each thing’, hekaston, in 1038b10 probably includes particulars such as Socrates and Callias, since 1029b14,
1032a8, 1039b25 refer to particular essences, and 1040b17 (in admitting the possibility that the substance of
something is numerically one) refers to them again. If Socrates and Callias are the bearers of essences, the species
form is a universal, and therefore not a substance; for it belongs to many things of the same species.
On 1038b12–15 I generally agree with Code [1978]. Unlike Ross, I take what follows pantôn d' ouch hoion te, b13, to
support it (and hence would prefer henos dê suggested in one ms., to henos d'ei). Aristotle argues: if it is the substance
of all, it is the substance of each one; but if you take any one you like (see Woods [1967], 218f), all the others will be
identical to that one. (Hence hôn gar. . . , b14, gives a reason for pantôn. . . . I render b14–15: ‘If the substance of
things is one (comma after ousia), then their essence is also one (no comma after hen) and the things themselves are
one.’)
Albritton's view ([1957], 706: if the substance of x and y has a given type of unity, then x and y have the same kind;
hence if their substance is one in species so are they) makes it hard to see why Aristotle should conclude that no
universal (or nothing spoken of universally) is a substance, since both species and genera satisfy Albritton's
condition. (See Woods [1967], 221–4.) Heinaman [1980] argues in detail that vii 13 regards particulars rather than
universals as substances.
At 1040b23–7 Aristotle assumes that what is common is what is found in many places at once, and that this fact
explains the inseparability of universals. He must assume, then, that if, e.g., man is in many places at once it is a
universal and not numerically one (see 3n20). Since a species-form is not numerically one, it is a universal, and
therefore within the range of Aristotle's objections to universal substances.
Catg. 2b7–14 claims that the second substance shows what the ﬁrst substance is; but it probably means only that
the second substance, e.g. man, shows what it is to be a particular man (i.e. some man or other), not that it shows
what it is to be this man (e.g. Socrates) in particular. In the Metaphysics Aristotle considers the question overlooked
in the Categories. He can therefore still agree with his claim in the Categories, distinguishing it from the false claim that
the universal reveals the essence of Socrates.
On 1038b16–22 see Woods [1967], 231–4. The argument assumes that the universal is only present in the essence,
as animal is present in the essence of man and horse. Aristotle replies that the genus is some account of at least
part of the species (b18–19, taking estai in 19 and esti in 20 as predicative); it will therefore be the substance of that
part; and (by the previous argument) the different species of animal will have an identical part and (if this is
supposed to apply to the relation of man to particular men) particular men will have a numerically identical part.
(In b23 eidei should probably be deleted, following Brandis, as an over-restrictive gloss; see Ascl. 431.11.)
On 1038b35–1039a3 Driscoll [1981], 151, argues: (i) a universal is predicated of countable particulars (pleiosin,
1038b11); (ii) the species-form

578

41.

42.

43.
44.
45.

46.

NOTES

is predicated of matter, not of particular compounds; (iii) matter without form is not countable; and hence (iv) the
species-form is not a universal and may still be a this. (Modrak [1979], 379, gives a less plausible argument for
denying that a species-form is a universal.)
Driscoll's (iv) does not follow from (i)–(iii). If we make four statues from four countable lumps of bronze, then, by
(iii), the lumps have some form; but they do not need the form of statue (but only the form of lump of bronze).
Hence the species-form of statue is predicable, consistently with (iii), of these four lumps, and so satisﬁes (i), and is
not a this. See also Code [1978], 72n13.
In vii 13 Aristotle concentrates on genera, to answer those who believe that substantiality increases with generality
(as 1028b34–5 suggested; cf. 998a20–b14, and § 89). For Plato, the speciﬁc Forms belonging to the generic Form
Animal are parts of a whole (Tim. 30c), and, like Aristotle, Plato thinks the whole is more substantial than its parts.
By discussing genera Aristotle attacks his opponents' most favoured candidates; but his arguments work equally
against species. He takes the treatment of universals as thises and particulars to be a basic error in the Theory of
Forms. The Platonists rightly thought universal substances must be Forms, because that would make each of them
numerically one and separable, which are necessary conditions for being a substance, 1040b27–30. But they did
not see that only a particular, not a universal, meets these conditions.
Plato thinks of proper names as abbreviations for descriptions, and so is ready to allow that something qualitatively
indistinguishable from Cratylus would be a second Cratylus, Cra. 432b4–c5. Similarly, an account of Theaetetus'
snubness requires only qualitative features, Tht. 209c. Aristotle believes that on this point Plato has misrepresented
the nature of particularity.
Popper [1953], 112f, defends Aristotle.
1040b25–6 (cf. PA 644a27–8, APo 87b30–3) seems to imply that actual, not only possible, plural instantiation is
necessary for a universal. 1038b11–12 (‘The universal is common; for what is called universal is what is of a nature
to belong to many things’) is ambiguous. See further § 41.
DC 277b32–3 distinguishes the form ‘by itself ’ from the particular form that is combined with matter (cf.
278a8–18), but does not say if the form without matter is in every case a universal. Even if all the suitable matter
available for noses has been used to make one particular nose, being a nose would still not be the same as being
this nose; and if all the available matter is used to make one world, even so being a world is not the same as being
this world, 278b3–8. Though this world is a particular, 278b3, it is not clear if being a world is a particular when it
has only one instance. Aristotle is free to claim that it is a particular, since it is in just one place at a time, and is
therefore one in number.
A particular (universal) can be deﬁned either (a) as what exists in only one place (in many places) at one time, or (b)
as what cannot exist (can exist) in many places at once. Both (a) and (b) make the divisions exhaustive. (a) implies
that properties such as being a man will be particulars if they have

NOTES

47.
48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

579

only one instance, that a universal comes into existence if another man does, and that the property may be either a
particular or a universal at different times. (b) also makes the division exhaustive, but implies that the property is a
universal even if it has only one instance. The priority of particulars requires (a); see 4n17.
Alexander, Quaest. i 11 (p. 23.25–24.1, 24.8–11; see Lloyd [1981], 54), attributes (a) to Aristotle. He seems to refer
to Met. vii 15, and seems not to take ‘being a world’ in DC i 9 to be a universal. Simplicius, in Catg. 85.5–9 (see
Lloyd, 75), uses (b) against Alexander's suggestion that the sun, the moon, and the world are particulars with no
universal.
The Stoic ‘peculiar quality’ is this sort of repeatable determinate property, lacking the essentially indexical aspects
of Aristotelian particulars (since the Stoics do not hold an essentially indexical account of place or time either). See
Simp. in DA 217.32–218.2, Lloyd [1981], 67f.
Our account of properties suggests a possible defence of Owens's claim, 390–5, 399 (cf. 14) that Aristotle
recognizes things that are neither universal nor particular. But, contrary to Owens, I doubt if the property could be
the substantial form that is Aristotle's primary substance. (See also Owens [1960], 18f.) For even if Socrates is the
only man, the property of being a man will not be his essence; hence it will be open to the arguments of vii 13.
Owens's view is sympathetically discussed and effectively criticized by Gewirth [1953], 588f.
1032b14 describes the essence as the ‘substance without matter’ and apparently regards the ‘form in the soul’
(probably a particular; see n36 above) that explains craft-production as such an essence. This immaterial essence
cannot be a this, and so cannot be a primary substance. It will be a secondary substance, in so far as it speciﬁes the
essence that will be a substance when it includes proximate matter. A similar argument will show why the universal
is a substance to some degree.
Sachs [1948], 223, Owens, 369, Harter [1975], 19, argue that the Met. does not accept the Catg. doctrine of second
substances. (Owens's argument that the two doctrines are consistent rests on a distinction between the order of
logic and the order of being, which does not seem to me to protect Aristotle's consistency; see 3n5.) Lesher [1971]
and Sykes [1975] deny that Aristotle has a consistent view about rival candidates for substance.
Lacey [1965], Lloyd [1981], 2, Harter [1975], 17, attribute nominalist or conceptualist anti-realism to Aristotle.
Lloyd's evidence (1040a4–5, APo ii 19, DA 417b19–24 (Lloyd, 9; and see below, § 169), 1039a33–b2 (Lloyd, 20; cf.
Plato, Parm. 131a–c)) does not show that Aristotle rejects realism, but only that he rejects some realist theories (e.g.
the view that a universal is numerically one in all its instances; for a good discussion see Heinaman [1982], 47).
Harter's version of conceptualism is not evidently consistent with Aristotle's conception of the objects of science.
Instead of accepting nominalism, Aristotle might claim that (1) universals belong to some non-substance category,
or that (2) they exist, but do not belong to any category. (1) is unattractive, since universals corresponding to
primary substances will not ﬁt into any non-substance category. 1039a1

580

53.

54.
55.
56.
57.
58.

NOTES

does not show (contrast Heinaman [1982], 46) that they belong in the category of quality, as the category is deﬁned
in 1020b8–13, on which see 3n32. But (2) will require all universals to be outside the categories (why should only
substance universals be outside?), which will then lose their primary classifying function, since the classifying
universals will be outside the category of the items they classify.
I have not discussed the defence of particulars in xiii 10, on which see Leszl [1972], Heinaman [1981a], Lear
[1987]. Though it is certainly relevant to this issue, I do not think it undermines these points in favour of the
universal. (I do not agree with Lear's attempt to show that thises are not particulars; see n3.) The extent to which
particulars are knowable does not show that reference to universals is dispensable for knowledge.
On this passage see § 2.
On this issue about priority see § § 52, 65.
This claim does not necessarily remain true if we take account of some of Aristotle's theology.
On the non-empirical character of dialectic see § 24.
see § 162.

Chapter 13
1. The theory should account for different types of appearances: (1) It must ﬁt the empirical appearances ‘proper’,
oikeia, to this area of study, 402b16–403a2 (on the appropriate sumbebêkota; see 2n17). (2) It should ﬁt common
beliefs, and in particular the views of previous theorists about the soul. Many of these are much more general and
abstract, and less direct products of observation, than the proper appearances.
2. Rodier [1900], 8, takes zô(i)ôn, 402a7, as 〉 ‘living being’; but cf. 402a10, 403b18, 413b14.
3. I take (a) poteron . . . , 402b5, and (b) ê kath'hekastên . . . , b6, to express two views that Aristotle eventually rejects
(and I take estin, b8, to express a counterfactual consequence, not Aristotle's actual view about the genus animal;
see Rodier [1900], 17, and contrast Hicks [1907], 185–7). If (b) is right, we should follow those who concentrate on
the human soul, and add further accounts of similarly narrow scope for other animals. If, however, (a) is right, we
should look for a single universal account that will apply to all animals. Being men is a genuine common property
of men, while being horses is not a genuine property of equine horses and clothes-horses. Though Aristotle does
not accept (a), he thinks there is some truth in it, and his own account of the soul rejects (b).
4. I take hôs eipein with trisin rather than with pantes. See Philop. 90.27–30; contrast Hicks [1907], 234.
5. If, e.g., we ﬁnd that the heart is the cause of pumping blood and the lungs are the cause of respiration, we might
deﬁne an organ called a ‘hung’, as the cause of pumping blood or of respiration or of both. But we will discover

NOTES

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.
11.
12.

13.
14.

581

nothing new about hearts and lungs, and we will have deﬁned no genuine kind of organ. Aristotle wants to avoid
the analogous result with ‘soul’.
Democritus, e.g., assumes that the soul can be the cause of movement only if it is some sort of stuff that is itself
easily moved and so can agitate the rest of the body, 406b15–22. Those (e.g. Empedocles) who explain perception
by appeal to the soul assume that perception must be the contact of like with like, of similar stuff in the object and
in the perceiver's body, 409b26–9.
Aristotle assumes that plants have souls, 409a9–10, 411b27–8, and rather unfairly criticizes other people for not
mentioning plant souls, 410b22–4. Plato admits plant souls, but infers that they must have perceptions and desires
too, Tim. 77b. (Cf. De Plantis 815a18 on Empedocles and Anaxagoras.) Aristotle, however, agrees with the general
view that plants do not have perceptions and movements, but insists that because they have life they have soul.
On the unintuitive character of Aristotle's attribution of soul to plants see Hardie [1976], 394f, [1980], 369–71. On
related questions see Matthews [1977].
Incorporeality: see 405a5–7, b12, 409b20–1. In Aristotle's view, those who identify soul with a ﬁne-textured body
implicitly recognize that it is not really an ordinary body. See Them. 14.4–8 (quoted but rejected by Hicks ad
405b11). Contrast Phil. 90.24–5, accepted by Hicks and by Rodier ad 405a6, b12.
In 411b25–7 I follow Hicks's text, with homoeideis . . . allêlais (〉 the souls in each of the insects formed from the
division of the ﬁrst one, as opposed to the ‘whole’ in the original insect) and dihairetês, without the ou in OCT (i.e.
we cannot split the original whole soul into many independently existing faculties, since these faculties are
inseparable from each other (allêlôn men hôs ou chôrista onta), and the whole soul is divisible only into complete souls).
In DA i Aristotle does not actually mention the connexion between Socrates and Socrates' soul, assumed by Plato
in the Phd. But it is clearly relevant; for the Pythagoreans and Plato afﬁrm the immortality of the person by
afﬁrming the immortality of the soul.
Aristotle refers to Pythagorean myths, 407b22, and so not necessarily to an explicitly immaterialist conception of
the soul. But his criticism applies equally to an immaterialist Platonic conception.
The attunement theory (cf. Plato, Phd. 92a6–95a2) seems to anticipate Aristotle's own conception of the soul as the
form of the body, 407b23–4. But his objections, 407b32–408a5, suggest that he thinks it misses the essential point.
An attunement or proportion of elements depends on the existence of just these elements, and cannot cause
movement in them. But in attributing perception or the origin of movement to the soul we treat it as a subject in
its own right, not as a quality or coincident of a subject.
see § 139.
The argument is this: (1) The living body is a compound of form and matter, 412a15–16. (2) It is a compound of
body and soul. (3) Since it is a

582

15.
16.

17.

18.
19.

20.
21.

NOTES

living body, it is a body of a certain kind, a16–17. (4) Hence the body is subject and matter, not said of a subject,
a17–19. (5) Hence the soul is not body, a17. (6) Hence the soul is not matter. (7) Hence the soul is form, a19–21.
Here (1) and (2) rest on assumptions about life and soul that are made clearer only in 414a12–14, discussed in the
text. Similar assumptions are needed to support the claim in (4), that the body must be matter (so that ‘is a living
body’ does not predicate a quality of a substance).
Empedocles on nutrition; see 5n23.
In 412b25–6 we must understand to sôma (cf. toiondi sôma, b27) with to apobeblêkos tên psuchên and with to echon.
Aristotle therefore commits himself to the continued existence of a body that once had a soul and has lost it. (Cf.
Them. 43.6–8, tou nekrou sômatos, and Hicks's translation.) ‘Potentially alive’ here must mean ‘potentially having the
life of the type of organism in question’; a seed has some sort of life potentially, since it is actually alive, and
Aristotle's point is simply that the seed or embryo of a dog does not have a dog's life potentially. see § 126.
The form is taken to be something that has matter, in to hou hê hulê, 412b8. Hicks, 315, sees this and thinks Aristotle
must be expressing himself incautiously, since, strictly speaking (in Hicks's view) only the compound, and not the
form, has matter. If we identify the form with the formal compound (and understand it in Wiggins's way, rather
than Ackrill's; see 11n24), there is nothing incautious or inexact in Aristotle's expression.
A mere reference to unity would not show that Aristotle has identity in mind; but to say that something and its
actuality are kuriôs hen, 412b9 (understanding hen with kuriôs hê entelecheia estin), is exaggerated unless identity is
intended. Charles [1984], 222n takes the passage to refer to constitution without identity; but this view will seem
less plausible once we distinguish proximate from remote matter. A similar question arises about Hartman's
suggestion, [1977], 99, that Aristotle has something other than strict identity in mind; see 11n34.
see § 127.
See Met. 1049a13–16, § 126. The claim that the body is potentially alive is explicable in the light of Aristotle's
conditions for potentiality. The states that constitute being alive depend on bodily organs; at the same time they
explain why the body has these organs and these movements—the body has the potentiality for these states. For
discussion of Aristotle's claims about potentiality and actuality in his account of the soul see Charlton [1980].
412a17 must be about the proximate body, since the discussion is about the body that is potentially alive.
We might compare other cases where the F and the G are the same but being F is not being G: (a) The musical
man is the white man, but their being is different (i.e. the deﬁnition of musical man is not the same as the deﬁnition
of white man). This is a case of coincidental identity between particulars (see Met. 1037b6, 11n37). (b) Universal
justice is complete virtue, but their being is different, EN 1130a12 (cf. 1141b23; the same state of character, but
the being is different). Qua one thing the state of character

NOTES

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

27.
28.
29.
30.

583

is justice, qua another thing it is virtue; the identity holds between the universal states, not merely between some of
their particular instances, and it is not merely coincidental (see § 228). (c) The Athens-Thebes road and the ThebesAthens road are the same, but their being is different, Phys. 202a18–20, b11–16. Here also the relation is not merely
coincidental identity. I do not think Aristotle means to deny identity (the relation satisfying Leibniz's Law) here, but
the issue is disputed. See White [1971], 179f, Miller [1973], Charles [1984], 10–15, Irwin [1986], 72.)
408b1–18 need not deny that the soul is a substance, even though Aristotle instructs us not to say that the soul is
afraid or angry, any more than that it builds or weaves; in all these cases we should say that the human being does
these things ‘with’ or ‘in respect of the soul, tê(i) psuchê(i), 408b15. In so far as these psychic states require some
movement, they require proximate matter, and in attributing them to the human being we make this fact clear. It
does not follow that the soul is not identical to the human being, or that it would be false to attribute these
processes to the soul.
Plato is right, then, to suppose that, e.g., we explain an action by referring to psychic states we are not explaining it
by reference to bodily constituents. He is wrong, however, to infer that the soul must be some further non-bodily
component added to the bodily components (the view rejected in Met. vii 17). In a way he is even wrong to infer
that the soul is not identical to the body, since it is identical to the proximate body; he is right only about the
remote body, and then only with qualiﬁcations.
Alex. Quaest. ii 26 (p. 76.25–33; cf. Rodier [1900], 186) argues from the dependence of the proximate matter on the
form to the conclusion that the soul is not in the body as ‘in’ a subject (i.e. in the Catg. sense of ‘in’). The same
argument works against the attunement theory.
If Socrates, as we might say, becomes a vegetable, and only the nutritive functions survive, then, in Aristotle's view,
Socrates must have ceased to exist and his soul must have been replaced by a nutritive soul that is continuous with
part of Socrates' soul. Socrates does not have three souls—nutritive, perceptive, and rational—though he certainly
has these three psychic activities, which are all parts of his rational soul. See also n45, 16n38.
We might conceive continuous human functions in fairly continuous remote matter, but functions that change so
radically as to persuade us that Socrates has been replaced by Callias in this remote matter. Aristotle can say that in
this case Socrates' soul has been replaced by Callias' soul only if he recognizes qualitatively different particular
forms and particular souls. On this issue see § 136.
My views are indebted to Taylor [1967], Boyd [1980], Sorabji [1974], Hartman [1977], chs. 3–4, Nussbaum [1984],
and especially to Shields's careful argument for regarding Aristotle as a dualist, [1986], ch. 3, [1988].
This passage is quoted and discussed in § 133.
Aristotle presents this as an objection to Pythagorean stories about reincarnation; but it seems to apply equally well
to the Platonic account. The same sort of objection may underlie 408b1–18.
see § 150.

584

NOTES

31. Some readers have interpreted remarks about the formal aspect of psychological processes as evidence that
Aristotle takes them to have some non-physical aspect; see Barnes [1971], 36–8, well answered by Sorabji [1974],
47f. For other dualist inferences see Hardie [1964], [1980], 77f, 370, Robinson [1978], [1983].
32. The argument against dualism relies rather heavily on some understanding of ‘component’, ‘element’, and ‘part’;
Aristotle sees some of the complexity in these notions, 1034b32–1035a4. He has to rely, e.g. in Met. vii 17, on a
distinction between the claims (a) that the syllable is to be identiﬁed with the letters plus another component, and
(b) that it is the letters plus something else; for he denies (a) and accepts (b).
33. On the importance of the heart see Block [1961], Hardie [1964], Hartman [1977], 106–9, Tracy [1983]. In saying
that the heart is kurion, Aristotle does not claim that the heart is any more essential to the creature than its spleen is
(since this is also called kurion tês ousias at 1024a23–8, noticed by Hartman; for this role cf. 1013a5, GA 771a13,
773a8–13; for en cf. Phys. 210a18–21). The same creature will have the same proximate heart (which may be
constituted of different remote matter), whose persistence therefore depends on the persistence of the same form
(of the whole creature); hence the persistence of the heart does not provide an independent criterion for the
persistence of the creature (pace Hartman, 108).
It is not so clear, however, that Aristotle is entitled to claim that the soul is the sort of thing that could be in one
part rather than in the whole body (and yet MA 703a29–b2 suggests that the soul is localized in some one part of
the body). If he identiﬁes the soul with the whole organism, conceived as its form, it is not natural to maintain at
the same time that the soul is in some part of the body, as though the organism were located in some part of itself.
If Aristotle changes his mind here, an explanation is not hard to ﬁnd. In other discussions of the soul Aristotle
does not identify it with actuality; but this is the crucial claim in the DA, showing how the soul can be identical to
the organism whose soul it is. Only the Metaphysics reaches a conception of form and substance that allows the
identiﬁcation. Before Aristotle has reached this position, he does not have this reason for resisting a conception of
soul that makes it a quality or potentiality of some part of the body; and that is the conception that is most easily
associated with the biological works.
For some purposes, and especially for the detailed content of the biological works, it makes rather little difference
which conception of the soul we accept. The actuality theory never excludes an important role for the heart, or
implies the unimportance of physiology. But we saw earlier that the Platonic claim that Socrates is identical to his
soul ﬁts very well with the doctrine of the Metaphysics; and it ﬁts less well with a doctrine that makes the soul a
quality or potentiality of the heart.
I have accepted the view that Aristotle's views about the relation of soul and body change, and that his claims
about the heart are a partial index of the change. This developmental view is expounded in an extreme form by

NOTES

34.
35.
36.

37.

38.

39.
40.

585

Nuyens [1948] (discussed by Lefèvre [1972], and partly supported by Ross [1955], [1961]. Block [1961], Hardie
[1964], and Kahn [1966] have encouraged scepticism about development. The scepticism is justiﬁed, to the extent
that an important role for the heart is quite consistent with the hylomorphic theory of the DA; but I do not think
this point undermines the whole developmental account.
This form of immaterialism is characterized as ‘Minimal Dualism’ by Shoemaker [1977], 141–53, who explores its
correspondences with materialism. A similar view is described in less detail by Putnam [1975], 291–5.
See Descartes, Letter of 23 Nov. 1646 (〉 Kenny, 208); Wilson [1978], 183–5.
Aristotle himself claims that thinking has no bodily organ, 429a15–27 (see 14n45 below), and that intellect, or part
of it, is capable of existing without a body, 430a22–3. Recognition of spiritual components is consistent with his
general hylomorphic view. Hence Robinson's argument from such evidence to the conclusion that Aristotle is a
dualist is unwarranted; see [1983], 123–8.
In 413a8–9 Aristotle suggests that it is unclear whether the soul is the actuality of the body in the way a sailor is of
a ship. A sailor (i.e. passenger; cf. 406a6) on a ship is no longer a sailor once he is out of the ship, but the man who
was the sailor still exists. Similarly, if something has a soul if and only if it has a spiritual component, the spiritual
component may be separable from the body. This degree of quasi-dualism is quite consistent with Aristotle's
general conception of soul. (Contrast Blumenthal [1976], 85f.) It does not imply Platonism (as Aquinas thinks, in
DA 243, SG ii.57 (1327)) or that soul and body do not make a genuine unity (as Descartes thinks, Med. vi (〉AT
vii.81). Aristotle identiﬁes a component of the soul, not the soul itself, with the spiritual component. It is therefore
unnecessary to alter the text as OCT does (by adding ê before hôsper in 413a8).
Among those who use this passage as evidence of Aristotelian dualism see Robinson [1983], 128–31. See also
Alex. DA 15.9–26 (perhaps inﬂuenced by Phys. 254b30–3); Hicks [1907], 321; Easterling [1966], 159–62.
An eliminative view is presented by Rorty [1970], Churchland [1984], Stich [1983], chs. 10–11. For a reductive
view see Armstrong [1968] (questions about its reductive aspect are raised sharply by Nagel [1970], 203). ‘Nonreductive’ materialism includes the views of those who think token mental events are identical to token physical
events, but no such identity holds at the level of types (see Davidson [1970]), and those who hold that the relation
is composition rather than identity (see Boyd [1980]).
For arguments against reductive materialism see Davidson [1970], Putnam [1975], Taylor [1967].
Charles [1984], 217–27, attributes to Aristotle a general argument for materialism, but I do not think the
attribution is warranted. See Irwin [1986], 74–6. Sorabji's view, [1974], 55f, on whether Aristotle is a non-reductive
materialist is not completely clear. Nussbaum's argument, [1984], 202f, to show that Aristotle is a non-reductive
materialist holding

586

41.
42.
43.
44.

45.

46.
47.
48.
49.
50.

NOTES

that material states constitute psychic states, fails to distinguish claims about proximate and about remote matter.
The version of materialism that Slakey [1961] attributes to Aristotle is still less warranted.
Hence the distinction between quasi-dualism and compositional materialism will be as clear as the boundaries of a
reasonable conception of matter.
On different appearances see § 19.
On the empirical aspects of Aristotle's views on formal and ﬁnal causation see § 148.
On materiate forms see § 132. If Aristotle is thinking of them, the reading logoi enhuloi in 403a25 (as in OCT) is
plausible, despite the fact that enhulos is a hapax legomenon in the Corpus. The most suitable sense is ‘having matter in
them’. Hicks appropriately cites Met. 1033a4–5. The variant reading logoi en hulê(i) makes sense, but its point is less
exact.
I accept Förster's [1912] transposition of hôste . . . thêriou, 414bb32–3, to b28, after toiouton. I take aphentas ton
toiouton, 414b27–8, to mean that a common deﬁnition of souls ought not to be pursued to the exclusion of an account
of each speciﬁc type (so that ton toiouton 〉 the speciﬁc accounts). See Hicks, and contrast Rodier. Aristotle is not
saying that the common deﬁnition is either impossible or useless, only that it is insufﬁcient. Hicks's comment, ‘the
study of soul in the abstract leads to no discoveries’, 337, is therefore exaggerated.
In speaking of different types of soul, Aristotle does not mean that a perceptive creature that nourishes itself has
both a nutritive and a perceptive soul. The lower soul is only present potentially in the higher, 414b28–32; to
reduce a dog to something with a purely nutritive soul we have to deprive the dog of his perceptive capacities, just
as we have to remove a side from a quadrilateral to make a triangle. (Hicks's and Ross's explanation of the parallel
is inexact.)
On the argument about nutrition see § 58.
On the form of teleological explanation see § 57.
What tends to promote a creature's survival need not always actually promote its survival; e.g. plants may begin to
grow in an early spring and then get killed by a late frost. But they have not been deceived about the spring.
This description need not be accurate—'description of indicates a causal relation, not a resemblance. It is possible
for an appearance to be an appearance of a rock that describes a rock as a hedgehog, because of the subject's
previous appearances.
We might challenge this appeal to ‘content’ here. Something has the relevant sort of content if it is related
appropriately to subjects who intend it or take it to have content. Hence to explain content we must apparently
appeal to some understanding of intending and taking. And so we must apparently concede that Aristotle's account
of a mental state cannot explain what a mental state is to someone who cannot recognize any mental states. This
concession, however, does not undermine Aristotle's account as a whole. We could have some notion of some
mental states without being able to give a general account of what makes a state mental; and Aristotle offers the
general account.

NOTES

587

Chapter 14
1. In Aristotle's repeated formula, hê phusis outhen poiei matên, we should understand matên to refer to pointless activity,
aiming at no end, rather than unsuccessful activity—Aristotle does not claim that nature is always successful in
achieving the ends it tends towards. In most contexts nature's way is contrasted with something done pointlessly,
or for no reason, or superﬂuously (periergon). See 415b16–17, 434a30–b8, DC 271a30–3, 290a27–35, 291b11–15,
PN 469a27–8, PA 641b12–15, 658a8–10, 661b3–5, 691b1–4, 694a13–15, 695b17–19, GA 739b19–20, 741b2–6,
744a36–b1, Pol. 1252b1–3, 1253a9–18. When Aristotle claims that nature does nothing inadequate, he
distinguishes this from the claim that nature does nothing pointless, GA 788b20–7, Pol. 1256b20–6; and the claim
about adequacy has exceptions, DA 432b21–3. On beneﬁt see further 15n9.
2. For beneﬁts from the senses see 434a30–b8, b9–29, 435b19–25, 411b22–4, 420b16–22, PN 436b12–437a3. A
capacity may beneﬁt both the individual creature and its species, since nature tends to reproduce creatures of the
same species, and thereby to confer a degree of immortality on the individual, 415a25–b7, 416b23–5. The function
of a sense or a sense-organ explains some of its properties, 420a9–11, 421a9–13 (where the function of the sense
explains a difﬁculty in identifying the object), and distinguishes it from other senses, 421b21–3; and the analogy of
organs in different creatures is determined by their similarity of function, 412b1–3, 416a3–5.
Aristotle's case is easiest with locomotive animals, 434a31–b8; but he also recognizes stationary animals that have
perception, 410b18–21, 413b2–4, 415a6–7, 432b19–21, HA 588b10–30, 621b2–5, PA 681b31–682a1. Even
though they do not move from place to place, they move parts of themselves; a sea-anemone or a shellﬁsh, e.g.,
may close up and protect itself if it is poked, HA 487b7–11.
3. In arguing that perception and appearance are not the same Aristotle claims that some perceivers, insects with a
low level of awareness, do not have appearance, 428a9–11. (As Hicks notices, following Torstrik [1862], the
inclusion of bees raises a difﬁculty in the light of Met. 980b21–7.) But later he agrees that if incomplete animals
with only the sense of touch have perception, then they also have appetite; and he concedes that they have an
indeﬁnite form of appearance, corresponding to their indeﬁnite form of motion, 433b31–434a7. These later
thoughts seem to be the best. See also 15n1.
4. On processes and actualities see 11n19. A process is directed entirely at some end distinct from it, and is
completed only when it is over, and has ceased to exist. Perception is different, since it does not aim only at some
end outside itself, and it need not cease to exist when an end has been achieved. For this reason it is not
appropriate to speak of perception as a process.
In Phys. vii 3 Aristotle argues that states of the soul in general are completions, 246a10–b2, that cannot come about
without alterations, but are not mere alterations, 246b10–20. He applies the distinction to the virtues and to states
of the understanding, 247b1–2, apparently allowing

588

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

NOTES

alteration in the perceptive part of the soul, 248a6–9. In the DA, however, he seems to apply the same distinction
to perception as well.
The passage is quoted and discussed at § 124.
On necessary conditions for change see § 37. Change between contraries requires the potentiality for losing one
contrary and gaining another.
The passage is quoted at § 124.
On Presocratic views see 13n6.
On truth as correspondence see § 2.
As Themistius explains, when a vegetable is affected by something with a taste (e.g. a pickle by brine), it is not
affected by it qua having the taste, but qua the sort of thing it is (i.e. by the causal properties of brine as brine; hê(i)
toiadi poiotês, 79. 19–20).
Aristotle might deny that this example satisﬁes F2, and claim that my body realizes its natural potentiality to
nourish itself from the environment (which in this case coincidentally involves getting wetter), not a natural
potentiality to become like the environment. But some conceivable potentialities to become like the object still
seem to count against Aristotle; we can imagine either plants or animals being able to camouﬂage themselves
without perception of the environment.
Aristotle sees that F1 and F2 by themselves might still seem no better than the Presocratic ‘like to like’ principle,
409b26–8. He replies that when I see a stone I do not get a stone in my soul, 431b28–432a3, but only the form
without the matter. To be affected ‘together with the matter’ is to have my matter affected by the matter of the
object affecting me in the usual way, so that if I become like the object I acquire the same power of material
interaction with other objects; if, e.g., the paint is spilt on me I can whiten other objects too and if I become wetter
by absorbing moisture some moisture can be extracted from me. Williams [1965] discusses F3 sympathetically;
Hirst [1965] presents some non-fatal criticisms.
F3 cannot understand ‘form’ in Aristotle's usual way. For the form he recognizes in the Metaphysics cannot exist
(if it is the form of a sensible object) without matter, and apparently the form is identical to the subject whose form
it is; but Aristotle assumes that we can absorb a form of a sensible object without its matter; we do not absorb the
material subject or state that has the form. We have a clearer conception of this form if we recall the claim that the
builder (or other craftsman) has the form of the house (etc.) in his soul when he begins to build the house and that
he uses this form to guide his process of building, Met. 1032b1, 11–14 (see 11n22). In natural generation the
preexistent form is the form of the parent, and so is the sort of form that is a substance; but in the production of
an artifact, no preexistent substantial form has a similar role. The builder has no actual house in his soul, since an
actual house includes the matter; but he has the form without the matter.
Sceptical questions about similarity are raised by Goodman, [1968], 1–10, [1970]. I do not mean to be committing
Aristotle to the claim that a clay model of Austria is more like Austria than a map is, or that in general degree of
resemblance distinguishes pictures from (e.g.) diagrams, or that

NOTES

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

589

degree of similarity explains degree of accuracy or provides some independent test of it.
Such ‘sensitivity’ falls short of ‘registration’ as Bennett describes it, [1976], 46–59; his account of registration
includes the aspect of content that is essential to Aristotelian perception (see esp. 48, 54 on the non-accidental
relation between P and ‘a registers that P’).
Perhaps some complex machines, e.g. computers and robots, might meet F3; but they do not necessarily raise an
objection to F3. If a machine is complicated enough to justify us in explaining its behaviour by the content of its
states, and not merely by their physical interactions (as we might ‘deceive’ a plant by heating it), then we may
legitimately wonder whether it is not aware of the features that are the content of these states.
In the DA Aristotle treats perception as a potentiality of the soul. He recognizes that functions of the soul belong
to the animal, 402a9–10, and to the body, 403a3–25; but he declines to discuss functions common to soul and
body, i.e. the physiological aspects of perception and desire, 433b19–21; cf. PA 643a35–b1. The PN, however,
takes perception to be a function common to the soul and the body, 436a6–10, b1–8, because it supplies the
empirical and physiological detail omitted in the DA.
The formal character of Aristotle's account makes it reasonable that he normally distinguishes senses by their
objects, 422b1–7, 23, 423b27–424a2. When he refers to a temptation to distinguish senses by their organs,
423a17–21, he does not endorse it. (Contrast Sorabji [1971], 85–92.) Some of Grice's objections to individuation
by objects [1962], 136–8, raise questions about the tenability of Aristotle's claims about the coincidental perception
by one sense of the objects of another. Grice adds introspectible difference to Aristotle's criteria. His argument is
challenged by Coady [1974], who also adds some functional criteria, 121–5, that are not Aristotle's, but ﬁt
Aristotle's teleology well.
Aristotle sometimes speaks of ‘the perceptive’, to aisthêtikon, as one of the parts of the soul. The parts of the soul
are its different faculties or potentialities; see 413a4, 413b14, 414a31, 432a18. The perceptive faculty is intended to
satisfy F1 (418a5–6), F2 (422a7, b15–16), and F3 (424a17–19). This faculty is distinguished from the organ of
perception, the aisthêtêrion; the organ is the primary bearer of the faculty (424a24–5), since that is where the faculty
belongs (423b30–1, 426b9). Hence Aristotle applies the formulae of perception to the organ as well as to the
faculty, 423b30–1, 425b23–4.
Since the organ is composed of remote matter that has ordinary perceptible qualities, it will itself have these
qualities; and if we can guess the sorts of qualities that are needed for absorbing the immaterial form, we can guess
that the organ has these qualities. Knowledge of the proximate matter may allow us to infer some of the properties
(at least disjunctively) of the remote matter. (Cf. Phys. 200a30–b8, and § 59.) But Aristotle does not imply that if the
object literally has a perceptible quality, it follows from that fact alone that the organ has the same perceptible
quality. We need not treat the formulae of perception as extravagant a priori physiology.
Aristotle argues that to perceive an object as hot or cold I must have an

590

NOTES

organ that is either cooler or warmer than the object—otherwise I would perceive no contrast. Similarly I would be
unaware of an object as hard or soft if it were no harder or softer than my organ of touch, 424a2–5. Though the
argument is dubious, it is strictly limited. Aristotle shows no sign of claiming that I become harder or softer when I
perceive hardness or softness.
The claims about taste, smell, and hearing allow the same sort of limited explanation, 422a6–7, a34–b5, 420a3–7.
The remarks about the organ of touch immediately follow the application of F2 to touch, 423b30–424a2; cf.
435a24–b3. My sense-faculty and sense-organ become ‘formally’ sharp when I touch something that pierces my
skin; but this formal similarity does not imply that formally similar things share their causal properties. For similar
reasons, the eye need not become coloured when it sees colour, any more than the builder's soul needs to acquire
all the properties of a house when it acquires the immaterial form of a house. Contrast Sorabji [1971], 49n22. The
evidence apparently committing him to such a claim about sight consists of general remarks about the faculty,
417a20, 418a3, 424a7, 18, b2, 425b22–4, 429a15, PA 653b24, or applications, such as we have seen, of the
formulae of perception to the organ, e.g. 435a20–4, or of the much more restricted claims about the physical
features of the organs of taste, smell, and touch, 423a7, 13–17, b30, HA 491b21.
21. The DA does not state the doctrine of the PN, that the heart is the central organ of perception, or that he thinks all
the perceptive faculties are united there, PN 467b13–468a1, 468a20–5, 469a2–b1. See Ross [1955], 8–12. In the
DA references to the heart are incidental and unimportant, 403a21, 408b8, 420b26, 432b31. Aristotle recognizes
that the organ of touch must be internal and cannot be the skin, 423b1–26; but only the PN connects touch with
the heart, 438b30–439a5. He recognizes that the senses are uniﬁed and that there is a single ‘mean’, the
intermediate condition required for perception, DA 431a19, but does not say that it must be a single organ.
(The eschaton in 431a19 need not be a single organ, i.e. some single bit of remote matter.) The PN, however, ﬁnds
the uniﬁed sense-organ in the heart, 459b6–8, 469a10.
Silence about the heart in the DA does not imply any conﬂict with the PN. (Contrast Block [1961]. See Hardie
[1964], 66f; but see also 13n33 above.) The formal account of the faculty of perception does not imply that the
material basis for the unity of the faculty must be found in a single material organ.
22. Aristotle tries to show how one physically plausible account might meet the a priori causal conditions for
perception; if no physically plausible account seemed possible, we would have some reason to believe that
perception is not possible either. If we reject Aristotle's empirical physiology, we will reasonably believe that some
more plausible physiology will satisfy the causal component of perception better. But if this is our view, we are
accepting Aristotle's formal account, not rejecting it.
23. Malcolm [1968], 62–73, offers this sort of argument as an objection to the ‘conceivability of mechanism’. It seems
to offer no objection, however, to

NOTES

24.

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.

591

any mechanistic theory that does not seek to eliminate mental states (contrast Malcolm, 53–5; but see also 72). It is
a far more serious objection to some eliminative accounts. Churchland [1984], 48, brieﬂy dismisses a less plausible
argument somewhat similar to Malcolm's (he argues against the view that an eliminative materialist claim cannot be
meaningful or true; he does not reply to the argument that even if it is true, we cannot justiﬁably believe that it is).
Aristotle describes perceptible objects in realist terms at 418a3, 31, 419a8, 19, 421a26, 422a10, 16, b15, 423b27,
424a22, 425b22. He uses ‘white’ etc. (as in other works; see 4n5, 10n5, 45) for the perceptible quality and for the
subject that is perceptible qua white (see 418a21–3, 425a24–7, reading alla to leukon in a26, perhaps supported by
Themistius 82.10).
On coincidental objects see Cashdollar [1973] (who claims on Aristotle's behalf that coincidental perception
involves the senses alone, but does not show that Aristotle is entitled to the claim). See also Block [1969].
Aristotle takes the qualities of bodies rather than the bodies themselves to be the objects of perception, because he
wants to isolate the explanatory role of perceptible objects. We often say that we perceive bodies themselves, but
on further analysis this turns out not to be the full explanation. I may say I see the tree over there; but I can be
asked for a further explanation: ‘How do you see the tree?’ I will answer that I see the tree by seeing a green shape.
Each of the initial perceptual judgments turns out to rest on an inference from a more immediate judgment
together with further information (that this shape belongs to a tree, that tea produces this sort of stain, etc.), and
the more immediate judgment partly explains the inferential judgment. Aristotle wants to ﬁnd the qualities in which
this sequence of explanations ends—some qualities that we simply perceive and do not perceive because we more
directly perceive some other qualities.
The appeal to explanatory asymmetry may help to answer Hussey's objection [1983], 65, that if one simply
considers which subject the kinêsis is the actuality of, one has no reason to prefer the patient over the agent.
On the teleological conception of potentiality see § 123.
My perceiving the rock is not simply my being affected by the rock; see § 160.
Aristotle argues as follows, 425b26–426a1: (1) The actuality of the object is the actuality of the perceiver. (2) In
perception the perceiver becomes actually red (e.g.). (3) Hence in perception the object becomes actually red. (4)
Therefore the object is actually red only when it is perceived. The previous claims about perception and actualities
support (1) and (2), and Aristotle thinks (2) implies (3). Once (3) is conceded, and we agree that the change is really
in the patient, the perceiver, we seem to have to agree that the object's being actually red is an event that happens
only when it is perceived, and that it is primarily a state of the perceiver; the object's being actually red consists in
its being perceived as red.
425b26–426a1 suggests that actual sound happens only when it is perceived; contrast 419b4–11, 420a7–9. In iii 2
Aristotle generalizes the account to all sensibles, so that, e.g., only seen colour is actual colour, and

592

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

NOTES

unseen objects are merely potentially coloured, 426a8–19; contrast 419a1–8.
If Aristotle uses ‘actually red’ in a rather eccentric way, simply to mean ‘being perceived as red’, without wanting to
deny that in the ordinary sense the object was red before it was perceived, then it is hard to understand his answer
to sceptics in 426a20–6—if he is using ‘actually red’ in his eccentric sense, he misunderstands their claim. Kosman
[1975], 513f, and Lear [1987], 157–60, seem to me to underestimate the difﬁculties raised by Aristotle's claim.
In Met. 1010b30–1011a2 Aristotle agrees that without perceivers there would be neither perceptibles, aisthêta, nor
perceptions, aisthêmata, since these are an affection of the perceiver, but insists that the subjects that produce
perception would still exist without it. In 1047a6–8 he urges that the Megarians must agree with Protagoras, and
say that nothing has any perceptible quality when it is not being perceived. In the DA Aristotle distinguishes two
claims: (1) Nothing is potentially white (etc.) without potential perception. (2) Nothing is actually white without
actual perception. Apparently he agrees with the Megarians and Protagoras about (2) and disagrees with them over
(1). But in Met. iv he seems to agree about (1) also. He gives an odd reason for accepting (1), that perceptibles and
perceptions are an affection of the perceiver, 1010b33. Even Aristotle's most stringent account of potentiality,
requiring the existence of breathers if air is breathable, Top. 138b3–5, does not imply that being perceptible is
simply an affection of a perceiver. The concession in Met. iv seems to bring Aristotle closer to Protagoras than he
wants to be in Met. ix.
Aristotle might claim: (1) if I see, I am always right in thinking I see colour; (2) if I see red, there is some actual red
object that I see; (3) if I think I see colour, I am right; (4) if I think I see (e.g.) red, I am always right. While (1)
might be defensible at 418a11–16, it does not ﬁt 427b8–16 (since (1) does not distinguish perception from the
corresponding ‘infallibility’ of appearance and thought). Neither (1) nor (2) ﬁts 428b18–30 (the qualiﬁcation at b19
would be inappropriate if (2) were meant), and here Aristotle seems to endorse (4), not merely (3); cf. 430b29–30,
PN 442b8, Met. 1010b14–25.
For different accounts of Aristotle's doctrine see Hamlyn [1959], Kenny [1967], 190–3, criticized by Scholar
[1971]. Block's discussion, [1961a], makes the difﬁculties especially clear, but underestimates Aristotle's
commitment to subjectivism.
Perhaps we might say (with Epicurus; see Taylor [1980], that the wall is brown now, whenever it looks brown, and
reject the assumption that it will continue to have this colour in normal daylight. But Aristotle cannot accept it; for
he does not think something loses its colour in the dark, 419a1–8, and he has no better reason to say that it
changes its colour in different light.
Aristotle conﬁnes his claims to the special senses, perhaps because the common sense depends on the special
senses and on inference from them; the right combination, e.g., of sight and touch produces the awareness of
movement. On Aristotle's view the reports of sight and touch are infallible, but inferences from them may not be.
Hence the reports of the common

NOTES

35.
36.
37.
38.

39.

40.

593

sense result from fallible inferences based on infallible reports by the special senses.
Aristotle cannot remove sceptical doubts about the external object, the hupokeimenon, as opposed to the perceiver's
condition, pathos. See 9n22.
see § 17, 7n5.
In 428b19–22 ‘x perceives the F’ must create an opaque context, involving belief that this is the son of Cleon, since
otherwise the question of error would not arise. 425a24–7 also suggests an opaque reading, while 418a20–2 allows
a transparent reading.
Aristotle rejects three views: (1) The common sense is a special sense on its own. (2) Common sensibles are simply
objects of the ﬁve recognized senses. (3) They are simply coincidental objects of perception.
He agrees that each of the ﬁve senses perceives the common sensibles only coincidentally, 425a14–15. But he
rejects any special sense for them, 425a20–7. A sixth special sense would be inconsistent with the role of the ﬁve
senses. If (1) were true, then the role of sight in perception of motion would be similar to its role in the perception
of sweetness; sight is dispensable for the recognition of sweetness, in a way that the special senses are not
dispensable for the recognition of motion, 425a20–7. (2) underestimates the role of the senses working together,
425a27–30. (3) makes the common sensibles coincidental objects of sense only in the way the son of Cleon is,
425a24–7. Aristotle assumes that we perceive movement, not just some sensible quality from which we infer the
movement.
In 425a21 idian 〉 a special sixth sense. In a28 idia 〉 objects of the recognized ﬁve senses. Torstrik's [1862]
deletion in a29–30 (followed in OCT) is reasonable. On the common sense see further Block [1964], [1965].
Aristotle distinguishes (as Hamlyn [1968], 128, and [1968a], stresses, and indeed overstresses; see Modrak [1981]),
but also closely connects, two functions of sense: (1) Common sense allows us to perceive the common sensibles.
(2) Uniﬁed sense allows each sense to perceive coincidentally the proper objects of the other senses, 425a30–b4,
426b17–427a14. He does not show why the unifying faculty might not be appearance rather than sense.
Aristotle asks whether second-order perception of sight belongs to sight or to some other sense. He offers two
answers: (1) We can say that we perceive by sight in more than one way, e.g. we perceive that it is dark because we
cannot see anything, 425b20–2. (2) What sees is indeed coloured, in so far as the sense-organ receives the form
without the matter, and to that extent acquires the colour of the object.
(2) implies that the faculty of sight acquires a new condition, ‘immaterial coloration’, when it and the organ receive
the form without the matter; in second-order perception and in appearance this is the condition we are aware of.
We are aware of the state the faculty is in when it receives form without matter. And we are aware of this ‘by sight’
in the way suggested by the ﬁrst solution; for it is the exercise of sight that makes us aware of the condition we are
in. The two solutions complement each other, and do not compete. On second-order perception see further
Kosman [1975].

594

NOTES

41. I take phantasia to be present whenever perception is part of a teleological explanation of an action. Schoﬁeld's
attempt to conﬁne it to non-paradigmatic sensory experience, [1978], 106, 109n20, appeals especially to 428a12–15
(see 114), which does not seem to me to exclude the presence of phantasia in accurate perception. On the other
hand, I hesitate to speak, as Nussbaum does, [1978], 258–60, 268f, of phantasia as active or interpretative, since it is
difﬁcult to attribute these characteristics to the appearances of non-rational perceivers (indeed, this difﬁculty partly
explains why phantasia, rather than anything more explicitly active or interpretative, is ascribed to such perceivers).
Phantasia is also discussed by Rees [1971].
42. I retain eti . . .d'ou, 428a22–4 (deleted by OCT); it makes clear the dependence of doxa on logos. I take akolouthein in a
logical rather than a temporal sense. On belief and evidence see Bennett [1964], 52–8.
43. Aristotle recognizes that there are signiﬁcant combinations that lack a truth-value, and mentions a prayer as a
signiﬁcant utterance (logos) that is neither true nor false, DI 17a2–4. When we pray ‘Thy will be done’ and when we
assert ‘Thy will is done’, we entertain the same proposition ‘Thy will is done’, but only in the second case do we
believe and assert it.
44. Aristotle's remarks do not commit him to anti-realism. He remarks that perception depends on external objects,
while it is up to us to think when we choose, since knowledge is of universals and these are ‘in a way’ in the soul,
417b19–26. The attitude to realism depends on ‘in a way’. It would be true to say that since thinking is of
universals and does not depend on causal confrontation on a particular occasion, universals must in some way be
available to be thought about by the soul. If this is all Aristotle means by speaking of them being in the soul in a
way, then his claim may be accepted.
Aristotle applies the formulae of perception to thought, claiming that when we think the faculty in a way becomes
the object, 431b20–432a3; if I acquire the form, the object is in me to the extent that a state of mine expresses a
quality of the object. Such a claim does not imply the rejection of realism about perceptible qualities or about
universals. On claims that do conﬂict with realism see § 164.
45. To this extent Aristotle can fairly claim that intellect has no bodily organ, 429a24–7. If he infers that the operation
of intellect requires no bodily process at all, or that it requires non-bodily processes, he is not justiﬁed in this antimaterialist claim (discussed by Hartman [1977], ch. 6, who is perhaps too quick to see evidence of antimaterialism).
46. The thoughts that are not combinations of thoughts, but the simple elements from which the combinations are
formed, 430a26–8, need not be acquired before we are able to combine thoughts.
47. See Kant, KrV A100–3. Kant allows that non-conceptual creatures can associate perceptions (Kant's ‘intuitions’)
without the capacities that he ascribes to creatures aware of the temporal character of their experience.
48. Davidson [1975], 163f, argues from the indeterminacy of the alleged beliefs of non-rational subjects to a sceptical
conclusion about their having beliefs. Reasons for hesitation in attributing very precise propositional structure to

NOTES

49.

50.

51.
52.

595

beliefs are given by Stalnaker [1984], ch.4, who uses some arguments similar to Davidson's to argue that
indeterminacy of content may be more widespread than Davidson suggests.
Perhaps the distinction between content and structure partly explains Malcolm's distinction between thinking that
p (taken to be possible for animals) and having the thought that p (possible only for rational subjects); see [1972],
49–53. The non-propositional (in the structural sense) character of animal feelings is discussed by Vendler [1972],
152–63.
Abstraction is discussed by Mueller [1970], Lear [1982], 162–75. (Cf. 8n43.) The parallel between the
mathematical and the psychological cases is not exact. In the psychological case, as opposed to the mathematical
case, the ‘poorer’ objects with ‘fewer’ properties (i.e. the animal psychological states) really exist in separation from
the ‘richer’ objects. In the mathematical case the poorer objects are used to describe the richer, and in the
psychological case the richer are used to describe the poorer.
Aristotle insists, against Plato, Rep. 602cd, Sph. 264ab, that appearance need not involve belief. See Lycos [1964],
Chisholm [1957], 43–54. But we still need to distinguish a non-rational perceiver's merely being aware of
something from the state that Aristotle himself regards as analogous to assertion, 431a8–17. The problem about
truth and falsity of appearances is discussed by Engmann [1976], whose solution does not seem to me to cope with
Aristotle's reasons for attributing something analogous to propositional truth and falsity to non-rational perceivers.
The Stoics recognize different uses of ‘aisthêsis’ (SVF ii. 71); but if it is used in its veridical sense they take it to
involve assent (ii. 74, 75, 78).
see § 25.

Chapter 15
1. 432b19–26 suggests that some animals are (1) stationary, and (2) without desire. But 432a15–18 challenges (1), and
414b1–6 challenges (2) (see 14n3). Since stationary animals can move and change different parts of themselves in
response to their perceptions, Aristotle, quite reasonably, thinks they must have desire. His broader conception of
the extent of desire seems more reasonable.
2. Aristotle challenges the division of the soul into rational, emotional, and appetitive parts, and the division into
rational and non-rational parts—if bipartition or tripartition is taken to divide the soul into separable parts,
432a20, b2. He argues that the difference relied on by his opponents multiplies separable parts beyond their
intentions; if we look for the sorts of differences that justify these divisions we ﬁnd many more separable parts,
even an indeﬁnitely large number, 432a24–31. Aristotle does not reject either of the two Platonic divisions; he
simply argues that the parts cannot be separable.
He therefore says nothing in the DA against his acceptance of the

596

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

NOTES

Platonic divisions in his ethical works, and says nothing in the ethical works to provoke the criticisms in the DA.
Contrast Gauthier [1970], ii.56 on 1098a3–4 (who takes the bipartition asserted there to conﬂict with the DA);
Rees [1957], 118, [1960], 197f (who takes the DA to attack the division of the soul accepted in the Ethics, though
he appeals (and is fairly criticized by Gauthier ii.92f) to 1102a23–6 to reject chronological inferences); Fortenbaugh
[1975], 26–8 (distinguishing Aristotle's biological psychology (DA) from his political and ethical psychology).
On the connexions of belief and desire see Geach [1957], 8f, Chisholm [1957], 181–5, Davidson [1970], 221f.
433a1–8 suggests, by appeal to continence and incontinence, that thought and desire seem to be movers, i.e. (1)
sometimes thought, sometimes desire, seems to be sufﬁcient for movement. But a9–26 suggests that (2) both (if
‘thought’ is taken to cover both reasoning and appearance) are always necessary for movement. 433a13–21 gives
the argument (similar to that in EN 1139a31–b4) for accepting (2) rather than (1). The role of thought and desire
in the DA is discussed further by Hudson [1981].
We might, for instance, say that sometimes watering the plants makes them grow, and sometimes fertilizing them
makes them grow, but sometimes each treatment is insufﬁcient to make them grow. We discover that neither
watering nor fertilizing is the real explanation of growth. The real explanation will refer to all the relevant
conditions of soil and atmosphere; sometimes we produce these by adding water, sometimes by adding fertilizer. If
this is a fair parallel, then we would need an account of the conditions in which sometimes thought and sometimes
desire seems to be the mover. (It is important to state this claim so that it does not commit Aristotle to the belief
that a cause must be a sufﬁcient condition; see § 57.)
We often say ‘I thought I should do it though I didn't want to’, and someone who claims that if we did it we must
really have wanted to after all is extending the ordinary use of ‘want’. Such an extended use of ‘want’ is defended by
Goldman [1970], 53–5, Brandt and Kim [1963], 426–32, Davidson [1963], 4 (who speaks of pro-attitudes). Nagel
[1970a], 27–33, argues that the extended use is trivial and theoretically useless; but see Charles [1984], 88.
433a21–2 raises the counterfactual possibility that intellect and desire might both be movers (i.e. independently of
each other). Aristotle replies that in this case they would be two species of a genus (so Themistius 119.9–12,
Philoponus 585.18–21), and we would need some account of the generic mover responsible for goal-directed
movement.
In claiming that nous is always correct while desire and appearance are not, 433a26–7, Aristotle presumably intends
nous more narrowly than logismos, since he does not say that logismos is always correct. Correct reasoning 〉 nous (cf.
Philoponus 585.25, ho alêthinos nous; Themistius 119.17, ho ge kuriôs) presumably ﬁnds the actual good, and incorrect
reasoning or appearance ﬁnds only the apparent good.
On the relation of the appearance to the actual good of the creature see 16n42, Dennett [1969], 177–9, Davidson
[1970], 221–3.

NOTES

597

10. On 433b8–9 see n20.
11. On this contrast between human beings and other animals see also § 215.
12. At Treatise ii.3.3, 415f, Hume makes clear the purely technical character of reason, by denying that reason can be an
‘original inﬂuence’; it is far less clear that Aristotle denies this. The limited and less-than-Aristotelian scope of
practical reason in Hume is explained by Falk [1975], 14–17 (who describes Hume's account as a modiﬁed
Aristotelian account). A much fuller and fairer discussion of Hume than mine is Sturgeon [HRP].
13. In Hume's view, we know whether or not we have passions, and what passions we have, directly, by introspection;
and no limits can be assumed for their contents or objects or mutual relations. See Treatise ii.1.2, 277: ‘The passions
of pride and humility being simple and uniform impressions, ‘tis impossible, we can ever, by a multitude of words,
give a just deﬁnition of them, or indeed of any of the passions.’ In understanding passions we look for ideas
‘presented to the mind’, 278. Hume is inﬂuenced by a Cartesian conception of mental states, and so does not
consider any restriction of their content that might result from their role in the explanation of action. Davidson
[1976], 278, argues that this is an oversimpliﬁcation of Hume's view; but it is one aspect that ﬁts well with Hume's
general conception of mental states.
14. On dialectic, common beliefs, and ﬁrst philosophy see § 95.
15. On the limitations of animals see § 171.
16. Action requires a so-called ‘practical syllogism’—a universal belief about the kind of thing that is good or pleasant,
a particular belief that this particular thing is that kind of thing, and the resulting belief that this particular thing is
good or pleasant, EN 1147a25–31, DA 434a16–21. On the assumption that we desire what is good or pleasant,
this concluding belief results in action. (I agree with Charles [1984], 91, in distinguishing the conclusion of a
practical syllogism from action on the conclusion.) This account of the relation of beliefs to action cannot apply
directly to non-rational animals without beliefs. In them appetite says only ‘I should drink’; and when perception or
appearance says ‘this is drink’, they drink at once, MA 701a32–3. Though past experience of sweet things affects
an animal's present awareness of this thing as sweet, Aristotle does not agree that the effect results from inference.
17. In speaking of ‘measuring by a single standard’ Aristotle commits himself to some form of commensurability
referring to the good. Charles [1984], 134, argues convincingly, against Burnyeat [1980], 91, that Aristotle
consistently accepts a version of commensurability.
18. When Aristotle suggests that if there is only one apparent means, we consider the means to that, EN 1112b17–20,
he omits cases where deliberation might show that the cost is morally or prudentially prohibitive (unless he
includes these under impossibility, 1112b24–8).
19. See Hume, Treatise ii.3.3, 416.
20. I take a parenthesis to begin at phainetai, 433b8, not at ho men, b7. Probably Aristotle means not that appetite always
makes something appear good haplôs, but that this is another effect of not foreseeing the future (as Hicks,

598

21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.

NOTES

561, says, a second mistake). See further Irwin [1986], 81, commenting on Charles [1984] 145.
Themistius 120.10–17 tries to restrict the point to human agents, by interpreting ‘perception of time’ very
narrowly, so as to deny it to non-rational perceivers.
A desire based on deliberation about the satisfaction of an appetite is not a decision; an incontinent person may
deliberate about the satisfaction of his incontinent desire, and act on the resulting deliberative desire, but he still
fails to act on his decision, EN 1111b13–15, 1142b18–20. Aristotle distinguishes wish from the other types of
desire by placing it in the rational part, 432b5, and describing its object as the good rather than the pleasant; that is
why decision is not concerned with the pleasant, 1111b16–18, but with the good.
I follow Anscombe [1965], 148, against Charles [1984], 151–3, in taking an agent's boulêsis to express her
conception of happiness as a whole; that is the best explanation of why the incontinent person does not act on a
boulêsis, and therefore does not act on a prohairesis. (The connexion between prohairesis and boulêsis is still clearer if we
follow the authorities that read kata tên boulêsin in 1113a12.) Charles's objections do not clearly explain what makes
a desire a boulêsis rather than a non-rational desire.
see § 191.
Following most critics (see e.g. Cooper [1975], 64n), I take telos, 1142b33, to be the antecedent of hou. The passage
should not be taken to exclude the possibility that correct deliberation about what conduces to the end will also
form the correct grasp of the end.
For fuller explanation and defence see § 191–3.
see § 215.
The energeia referred to in 1100a1 is ﬁne action proceeding from a virtuous character, 1099b31–2. Since a virtuous
character requires the right prohairesis, and a rational soul (cf. Aspasius 27.11–13), and this requires a conception of
one's life and one's good (see n22), animals and children cannot have it.
Met. 1046a36–b13 contrasts non-rational potentialities of inanimate things with the potentialities involving reason
in animate things. 1047b31–1048a11 contrasts the congenital potentialities, e.g. perception, with the potentialities
acquired ‘by habit and reason’, 1047b34. Aristotle has no clear place for potentialities that are acquired by training
in non-rational subjects (or by non-rational training in rational subjects). If he recognizes the possibility of such
training, but refuses to call it ethismos, then ethismos includes some rational component. (On this point see Sorabji
[1973], and Burnyeat [1980].
EE 1224a28–30 denies prattein (i.e. rational action) to animals, but neither denies nor afﬁrms that their movements
are voluntary. It is not clear which condition for voluntariness they would fail (perhaps eph' heautô(i) on, 1225b8).
Aristotle suggests that we praise the good person and his virtue for his actions and achievements, and that we
praise the strong person or the good

NOTES

31.
32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

599

runner for being well equipped for something good and excellent, EN 1101b12–18. This remark does not show
whether the good runner must have made himself good by his own efforts; when Aristotle says we praise him
‘because of his (i) being of a certain sort by nature, pephukenai, and (ii) being in some state in relation to something
good and excellent’, 1101b16–18, he might be taken to suggest that someone's natural, non-voluntary condition is
a ground for praise. But such natural talent would be a capacity, and Aristotle seems to distinguish capacities from
the conditions that are praised, 1101b12; cf. 1105b28–1106a10. If this is right, we must not take clause (i) to imply
a condition wholly antecedent to the agent's efforts, or else we must take (i) and (ii) to state two distinct
components of the condition that is praised (perhaps suggested by Aspasius 32.30–1).
Hume, Inquiry, 98. See Irwin [1980], 134f.
If 1111a22–4 means that an action is voluntary and I am responsible for it if it is caused neither by force nor by
ignorance, the account cannot be quite right. For I may know I am digesting my food without digesting it
voluntarily; my knowledge makes no difference. Even if it makes some difference, even if it causes my action, the
action does not thereby become voluntary. My knowledge that I have eaten something poisoned may make me so
anxious that my digestion is upset, but I need not have upset my digestion voluntarily. Aristotle needs to say that
my knowledge is not only a cause, but also a cause because it is a reason for my action. See further Irwin [1980],
122f.
If I am pushed into you and knock you over when I wanted to knock you over in any case, we might say that I
contribute a desire capable of causing the action, even though in fact my contribution was unused (I may
contribute money towards the erection of a building even if my contribution is not needed). This sort of
contribution explains why forced action is always painful (1110b11–13; cf. EE 1224b8–16). Sauvé's persuasive
discussion in [1987], ch. 4, reaches a different conclusion.
We are to imagine, e.g., that Oedipus killed the old man because he did not know it was his father, but when he
ﬁnds out he does not mind; though he would have wanted to avoid killing his father, he would have wanted this
for the wrong reason, since he does not mind that his father is dead. The result is not contrary to his desire, though
it should be.
If the internal origin is sufﬁcient for voluntariness, then actions caused by ignorance cannot have their origin in the
agent himself. The event that was Oedipus' ignorant slaying of his father was also a voluntary action of
Oedipus'—in so far as it was killing the old man; and so the event had its origin in Oedipus. However, in so far as
it is killing his father, it does not have its origin in Oedipus—for his choice was not to kill his father, but to kill the
old man. Aristotle is justiﬁed in claiming that the origin of the event, in so far as it was the killing of his father, was
Oedipus' ignorance, and not Oedipus himself. (For such ‘negative’ causes cf. Phys. 195a11–14.)
The demand for an internal origin should cover actions that are just like forced actions except that they are what
the agent wants to do. In such a case, Aristotle must claim, the agent makes a causal contribution that just

600

NOTES

happens to go unused in this case, so that he acts voluntarily. If this is right, then ‘origin’ must be taken to include
not only the actual efﬁcient cause, but also the sufﬁcient causal contribution that is made but not used. Hence,
despite ﬁrst appearances, the origin of the willing prisoner's imprisonment is in himself and not entirely external.
The two apparently distinct conditions, external causation and non-contribution by the agent, are really parts of a
single condition for forced action.
37. If capacity for decision is a condition for responsible agency, the condition can be modiﬁed to provide a condition
of responsibility for an action. Just as it will be pointless to treat an agent incapable of decision as a responsible
agent, it will be pointless to treat him as responsible for actions he cannot affect by decision. See further Irwin
[1980].
38. On this passage see 16n23.

Chapter 16
1. The text in 1214b34–1215a3 is dubious. Aristotle imposes some restriction on indiscriminate consideration of the
views of the many. But I do not agree with the emendations (accepted by Rackham [1935], and Woods [1982]) that
require him to restrict his attention to the views of the wise—a restriction unparalleled in any other work. On
exetazein see 2n38.
2. Teichmüller [1879], iii. 12–35 (see also Ando [1958], 169–73), argues that ethics (the discipline practised in the
Ethics) is the same as phronêsis, and is therefore practical and deliberative. I agree, but I do not follow Teichmüller
(see n20) in inferring that ethics must therefore exclude the appeal to other areas of philosophy that I take to be
characteristic of strong dialectic.
3. At 1094b19–27 (no EE parallel, as Devereux [1986], 498f, points out) Aristotle disclaims any ambition of ‘exact’
demonstration in ethics, because ethical premisses have to be ‘usual’, not necessary. The implications of this
remark are not clear. (1) While practically useful moral rules may have exceptions (1103b34–1104a11,
1164b22–1165a4), it is not clear why, e.g., ‘It is always ﬁner to be brave than to be cowardly’ should have
exceptions. (2) Usual premisses do not always exclude demonstration (see APo i 30; cf. 5n30).
This passage, then, does not itself rule out ethical demonstration. On the other hand, Aristotle never contemplates
demonstration of ethical conclusions, and never suggests that nous grasps ﬁrst principles. (See further Irwin
[1981a], 197n, and Allan [1961].)
4. On 1172b36 see 2n71.
5. My account of Aristotle's theory is mainly derived from the EN rather than the MM or EE (which I take to
represent, in that order, earlier stages of Aristotle's ethical thought). At some points (e.g. the function argument,
the defence of friendship) the EN relies more clearly on metaphysical premisses; but I have not tried to compare
the works in detail on this point. The remarks on dialectic are somewhat fuller in the EE (including the

NOTES

6.

7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

601

‘Common Books’, EN v–vii, which I take to originate in the EE) than in the EN, but I see no doctrinal difference
about it. I am less sure that the method of the EE is the same as that of the EN at every point, partly for some of
the reasons suggested by Allan [1961], but I am not sure how deep the differences are. I think both Ethics share the
aim of ﬁnding archai; contrast Kullmann [1974], 227f. On some questions about the ethical works see further Irwin
[1980a], Cooper [1981], commenting on Kenny [1978], [1979].
On the dialectical character of Aristotle's ethics see Burnet [1900], pp. v, xxxix–xlii (who assigns an important role
to intuition, since he has a limited view of dialectic), Cooper [1975], 58–71 (who, like Teichmüller (see n2)
overestimates the difference between dialectical and deliberative reasoning), Hardie [1980], 35–45, 366–8 (who
underestimates the difﬁculty of ﬁnding demonstrations in ethics). The difﬁculty about dialectical arguments
claiming to reach objectively true conclusions is sharply raised, with special reference to Rawls [1971], by Dworkin
[1973], 27–36. A similar point is made by Barker [1906]; see n20.
On scepticism see Burnyeat [1980a], esp. 41f, and on moral scepticism Annas [1986a].
Burnyeat [1980], 81, 90 (n15) argues from 1179b4–31 that Aristotle does not intend the Ethics to persuade anyone
who lacks a good upbringing that the virtuous life is worth while; the function argument, e.g. ‘is not an argument
that would appeal to anyone who really doubted or denied that he should practice the virtues’ (90). Whether or not
this is true (contrast Pol. 1332b1–8), we should not infer that Aristotle does not intend his argument to prove to
any rational person's satisfaction that a critic of the virtues is mistaken, and that it is bad for a person to be vicious
(cf. ix 4, esp. 1166b26–8). If we are too corrupt to be persuaded by a proof that ought to persuade us, that is a fault
in us, not in the proof. There is no good reason to think that Aristotle believes that only people with a good
upbringing ought to be persuaded by his arguments.
On the kalon see further Engberg-Pederson [1983], ch. 2, Irwin [1985a], and § 237 below.
On Plato's correction of common beliefs see Irwin [1977a], 208f.
see § 148.
Plato, Rep. 353b–d, MM 1184b22–7, EE 1218b37–1219a28, appeal to x's function primarily to explain x's
goodness, i.e. x's virtue, rather than x's good, i.e. x's welfare; and then they have difﬁculty in connecting goodness
with welfare. (The difﬁculty is stressed and discussed by Wilkes [1978], 354–6.) 1097b22–1098a7, by contrast,
connects x's function directly with x's good, i.e. welfare.
The prospectus at EN 1181b2–23 sets out these tasks. We should, ﬁrst, discuss any suggestions by our
predecessors; second, consider from the collected constitutions the means of preserving and destroying cities and
constitutions, and why some cities conduct their political affairs ﬁnely and others do not; and, third, ﬁnd the best
state, its constitution, laws, and habits.

602

NOTES

The three parts of the prospectus correspond roughly to Books ii, v–vi, and vii–viii. Nothing explicitly
corresponds to i, iii, and iv. But this will not matter much if the three unmentioned books clearly forward the plan
described for the work. This point undermines Newman's arguments, [1887] i.3, to show that the Pol. does not
follow the plan of the prospectus.
The aim of ﬁnding the best state and constitution is mentioned at the beginning of Book ii, 1260b27–36, and of
Book vii, 1323a14–16, but is not introduced to justify the discussion in Book i, or in Books iii–vi. Book i is
introduced without any explanation at all. Book iii is addressed to someone ‘reasoning about the constitution, what
and what sort each is’, 1274b32 (cf. 1260b12, 1272b27, 1288b3, 35, 1293b29, 1329a40). Its discussion is a basis for
the account both of the best state and of the more generally practicable states (Newman, i.226, iii. 130f). In Book iv
Aristotle elaborately justiﬁes his discussion of actual as well as ideal constitutions, 1288b10–1289a7, by arguing that
the science studying the best constitution should also study the best that is suitable for most people and the best
that is possible if certain restrictions are taken for granted, 1289b11–26. This general aim provides the justiﬁcation
for the inquiry into political changes, begun in v, 1301a19–25. The prospectus in the EN gave a reason for
studying actual constitutions—that this would prepare us for the study of the best constitution. But Pol. iv suggests
that actual constitutions should be studied for their own sake, as an appropriate part of political science. The
transition from the inquiry into the ideal, recalled at the end of iii, 1288b2–4, to the study of the actual at the
beginning of iv is especially harsh. Not surprisingly, it has encouraged the suggestion that Aristotle intended Books
vii–viii to follow iii. Zeller [1897], ii.502–4 summarizes the arguments for this view.) But if we transposed the
books we would break the order prescribed in the prospectus, which makes a study of actual states a necessary
preliminary to the study of the best state. I agree with Ross [1957], 5–7, in preferring the ms. order for this reason.
Contrast Brandt [1974], 196–200, who argues unconvincingly that the EN does not refer to the extant Pol.
Four different aims, then, are stated in the Pol.: (1) The study of the best constitution. (2) The technical and
therapeutic aim of repairing actual constitutions. (3) Finding the best constitution, given certain assumptions about
the circumstances. (4) Understanding the parts, growth, varieties, and functions of the city (biological analogies:
1252a17–26, 1290b25–38, PA 644a29–32). On the relation between these aims see further 21n38, Rowe [1977].
14. See 8n4.
15. On assumptions see 20n16.
16. Sometimes Aristotle argues from common beliefs, and tries to solve puzzles that they raise. Much of the argument
in Pol. i and iii proceeds by raising and solving puzzles, conforming to the advice of EE 1235b13–18; see Pol.
1253b14–23, 1255a3–4, 1258a19, 1259b22, 1275b34, 39, 1276a22, 1277b33 (showing that the previous questions
have also been aporiai), 1281a11, b22, 1282a23, 32. In the empirical books, iv–vi, the characteristically dialectical
method of raising and solving puzzles is much less frequent

NOTES

17.
18.
19.

20.

603

than in i and iii. (On the different roles of aporetic argument see Newman [1887], i. 352, 480, 490, ii. 133, 387, iii.
498.) While Books i and iii proceed largely by raising puzzles and by offering Aristotle's characteristic
‘determination’ or ‘deﬁnition’, dihorismos, to solve them, this method with its associated vocabulary largely drops
out of iv–vii, though it reappears in vii with the discussion of education; see 1336b24–6, 1340b33–4. Book vii does
not use puzzles in its ethical argument, since it is applying and summarizing principles that have already been
worked out. (But see 1324a25, 1327a13; for amphisbêtêsis cf. 1274b34.) Puzzles are also out of place in the empirical
books, since Aristotle is there applying the principles he has worked out by solving puzzles, and illustrating their
application with detailed examples.
The Pol. never seems to use ‘puzzle’ in the way characteristic of, e.g., the GA, referring to cases where we just lack
empirical information that is needed to answer a question. On this point the Pol. is closer to the philosophical than
to the empirical works. see § 20.
Some of Aristotle's arguments might be accused of reliance on partisan assumptions that the other side have been
given no reason to accept; see e.g. § 36.
See 1253b14–23, 1255a1–5, b4–5, 1257b5–30, 1259b21–1260a2, 1274b34–6, 1277a20–5. For the arbitrator see
Met. 995b2–4, DC 279b3–12. The middle class plays this political role, 1297a5–6; see § 249.
Wood and Wood [1978] present an especially clear and crude attack on the conservative character of Aristotle's
political theory. They claim that ‘Aristotle's social and political ideas are fundamentally ideological, forged as
weapons to be used in the political struggles of his age’ (209). See the criticisms by Vlastos [1980], 345f. Some of
their less unconvincing arguments rest on an exaggerated account of Aristotle's respect for received opinion in his
philosophical method (216f). A much more just (indeed over-charitable) and accurate account of Aristotle from a
Marxist point of view is presented by De Ste Croix [1981]; see 21n37.
Newman [1887], i. 5, exaggerates the purely dialectical aspects of Aristotle's ethical and political method (appealing
to 1097a28, 30, 34), though he also modiﬁes his exaggerated claim (11–14). Teichmüller [1879], iii.352–7, argues
more strongly that Aristotle has no right, within his own conception of practical inquiry, to rely as he does on his
conclusions in metaphysics and natural philosophy, 356. See n2 above. Teichmüller takes an equally limited view of
the capacities of dialectic.
Barker's account of Aristotle's method also makes it seem close to pure dialectic, [1906], 231: ‘It is actual Greek
practice, and contemporary Greek opinion, which form Aristotle's starting-point. . . . What he does is to generalize
and to rationalize all these data in the light of a doctrine of Final Causes; and in the light of that doctrine he
occasionally corrects or modiﬁes the opinions and practices on which his theory is based.’ Barker greatly
underestimates the extent to which Aristotle corrects common beliefs.
Later Barker explains why he thinks pure dialectic is the special method appropriate to practical as opposed to
theoretical science: ‘ . . . its subject is political institutions moulded, worked and directed by men's minds—

604

21.
22.
23.

24.
25.

NOTES

alterable by human thinking, and by human thinking made what they are. And thus while a theoretical science like
physics, dealing with things eternal, need not so much be treated—though by Aristotle it is treated—with reference
to previous research or opinions, a practical science like politics must always be discussed with regard to opinions,
because it is constituted by them’, 252. Barker acknowledges that Aristotle does not mark the distinction of
method to which Barker refers; and the reason Barker gives is not a good one in any case. (Practical science studies
the tendency of human institutions to promote the human good; and it is not clear how human beliefs constitute
the subject-matter of this study.)
Barker also recognizes (as the reference to ﬁnal causes in the ﬁrst passage above suggests) another side of
Aristotle's method: ‘And here the second, or a priori, element of discussion enters. For Aristotle applies to opinion
metaphysical principles of his own, principles elsewhere established, to elicit the deeper meaning of opinion, or to
correct its errors’, 253. Barker is quite right to emphasize this aspect of Aristotle's method (though ‘a priori’ is a
rather disputable description of it); but he does not explain why it is reasonable for Aristotle to apply it to a subject
that is allegedly constituted by people's opinions. The second passage from Barker reﬂects a view similar to those
who think the pursuit of ‘reﬂective equilibrium’ in moral theory conﬂicts with a realist conception of its subjectmatter (see n6 above). But he also recognizes the aspects of Aristotle that go beyond pure dialectic.
See, e.g., 1254a17–20 on unnatural slavery, 1254b27–34 on ‘natural’ distinctions that are often absent, 1258a6–10,
a35–b8 on unnatural accumulation of possessions. Aristotle is criticized for combining descriptive and prescriptive
elements in his claims about nature, by Robinson [1962], p. xx.
Following Hardie [1980], 16f (among others), against Ackrill [1974], 25f, I take 1094a19–21 (kai mê . . . orexin) to
state a necessary, not a sufﬁcient, condition for the existence of a ﬁnal good. 1094a24–b7 argues for the existence
of such a good.
EE 1214b6–11 claims that everyone capable of living by his own prohairesis actually does set up some ultimate end.
For epistêsantas 〉 ‘having noticed, attended to’ cf. GC 315a34, b18, PN 459b25, DC 300b21, Pol. 1335b3. Contrast
Woods [1982], 200. Rackham [1935] is therefore probably wrong to translate by ‘should set before him’—though
the parenthesis hôs to ge mê . . . sêmeion estin, b9–11, makes this translation more attractive. The TO less plausibly
takes epistêsantas as ‘enjoin’. The account of rational agency shows how the psychological claim (cf.
1101b35–1102a4) might be defended. For discussion of the psychological claim and the EE passage see
McDowell [1980], 263f, Cooper [1975], 94.
On deliberative appearance see §§178–80.
Political science might discover that we need shoemakers to mend sails instead of making shoes, and that we
should manage with fewer shoes than the unregulated shoemakers would have produced. The end of political
science, therefore, includes the end of shoemaking to the extent that the

NOTES

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

605

subordinate end is really good for us; and we ﬁnd whether or not it is good for us by considering its end against
the ends of all other sciences and pursuits—if we leave some out we may be wrong in our estimate of shoemaking.
Hence if political science is to regulate the pursuit of different ends correctly, its end must include the ends of all
the other sciences.
Aristotle is right, then, to conﬁne his claims about pursuit of the good to a proper subset of voluntary actions. He
mentions crafts and disciplines (methodoi) and actions and decisions, 1094a1–2, 1097a16–22. All these involve
rational, deliberate actions. They are all ultimately actions on decision (prohairesis), since Aristotle thinks that
practical intellect provides the end that guides productive intellect, 1139a35–b4. These actions do not include
actions on non-rational desires, which do not aim at any good. Hence Aristotle does not agree entirely with the
Eudoxan account of the good as what all things aim at, 1094a2–3, if that implies that we aim at the good in all our
voluntary actions.
This sort of Kantian argument is discussed by Beck [1960], 166–75.
See further 2n65.
See §151.
On formal conditions see Ackrill [1974], 21 (who goes further than I would in taking them to be analytically or
conceptually true), White [1981], 231–3.
I render teleion as ‘complete’, rather than ‘ﬁnal’ or ‘perfect’. (Ackrill [1974] uses ‘ﬁnal’ and (27f) ‘complete’; Cooper
[1975], 100n, favours ‘ﬁnal’; all three renderings appear in the TO.) ‘Complete’ is needed at 1098a18 for the bios
teleios; and this is so closely connected with teleiotatên, immediately proceeding, that we should try to render the term
uniformly throughout the argument of i 7. This initial argument about the EN might be supplemented, though
more disputably, by appeal to MM 1184a8–14, EE 1219a35–9.
Aristotle argues: ‘If only one thing is complete, this will be the good we seek; if more things are complete, the good
we seek will be the completest of these’, 1097a28–30. In his support he describes three degrees of completeness:
(1) x is completer than y if and only if x is pursued for its own sake and y is pursued for the sake of something else.
(2) x is completer than y if and only if x is pursued for its own sake and never for the sake of something else,
whereas y is pursued both for its own sake and for the sake of x. (3) x is unconditionally complete if and only if x is
always chosen for itself and never for the sake of something else, 1097a30–4.
In (1) we must take y to be pursued only for the sake of something else (for if both x and y were pursued for both
reasons, each would be completer than the other). We might say that relative to shoemaking the comfort of our
feet is the completer end; for when we achieve that, we completely achieve the end that is relevant to shoemaking.
The difference between (2) and (3) depends on the force of ‘always', which might mean (3a) whenever we choose
it’ or (3b) ‘in all our choices’. Aristotle probably intends (3b); if he did not, he would unaccountably overlook one
feature of the good described in i 2—it must be that for the sake of which we choose all other things (cf.
1097a18–19).

606

31.
32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

NOTES

We might argue that, e.g., pleasure or a good conscience satisﬁes (3b), in that (i) we choose it in every choice we
make, and (ii) we choose it only for itself, not for the sake of anything else; and yet perhaps (iii) it is not the whole
ultimate good, since there are several different things that we also choose for themselves and not for the sake of
anything else. Aristotle replies that such goods in fact fail (ii), because we choose them also for the sake of
happiness, supposing that through them we will be happy, 1097b1–6. All the partial intrinsic goods, such as virtue,
honour, and pleasure, are chosen as parts of the whole that they constitute. For further discussion of this argument
see Engberg-Pederson [1983], ch. 1.
See §138.
Psychological egoism is sometimes defended by consideration of desires one at a time, or by reﬂexion on what
makes any desire at all intelligible. Hume and Mill, e.g., suggest that inspection of each particular desire and its
ultimate object will always discover pleasure. Aristotle's argument for psychological egoism, by contrast, is
essentially global and structural. Our comparison of different objects of desire reveals our pursuit of a ﬁnal good;
and this structural feature of desires is not visible in a single desire considered in isolation. Cf. §176.
The account of a person's good in Rawls [1971], 408–24, involves deliberative rationality applied to a person's
wants, and hence results in a conative theory, given Rawls's conception of deliberative rationality. Though the
‘Aristotelian principle’, introduced at 424, leads to some views similar to those connected with self-realization, 431,
it relies on claims about what people want that remain within a conative theory. A conative conception is applied to
EN i 7 by Engberg-Pederson [1983], ch.1; it especially inﬂuences his account of self-sufﬁciency (which does not
explain the reference to a human being's political nature).
The contrast between conative and normative conceptions is related, though not identical, to Kraut's contrast
between subjective and objective conceptions; see [1979a].
I might concede that I need the instrumental beneﬁts of support and cooperation—to help me gather my harvest,
dig sewers, use public transport, and so on—without agreeing that the good of others is to be chosen for its own
sake as a part of my own good. However, Aristotle assumes that my good includes the good of these other people,
since the self-sufﬁcient good is to be sufﬁcient both for myself and for others—sufﬁcient, that is, for their good. See
§215.
Aristotle claims that the ﬁnal good is the most choiceworthy of all, not counted with other goods. If it could be
counted with others it would be one of a number of goods; hence the addition of another good would create a
greater good; but if another good is greater than our alleged ﬁnal good, our alleged ﬁnal good is not ﬁnal after all,
1097b16–20. This is probably a further explanation of self-sufﬁciency, and hence of completeness. If the ﬁnal good
really makes life lack nothing, then life cannot be made better by the addition of some further good; otherwise the
lack of that good would be a failure to achieve self-sufﬁciency.

NOTES

607

I follow Ackrill's interpretation of this passage, [1974], 23f, and the further discussion by Cooper [1981], 384f.
Though some of MM 1184a15–38 is obscure, its main tendency is parallel to that of 1097b16–20.
37. Aristotle begins to explain the notion of function by one of his normal expository devices, an appeal to crafts,
1097b24–30. The good for a craftsman consists in his function, in his doing what a craftsman does. In so far as we
understand something as an F, what is good for it will be doing what F does; that is what is good for it as F. Since
we know what craftsmen qua craftsmen do, we can easily say that the good of a tailor qua tailor consists in cutting
and stitching.
The usefulness of this appeal to function, however, depends on the character of the description under which the
function is ascribed to the subject; if Socrates is a tailor, an idler, and a gourmand, we can ﬁnd what is good for
him qua each of these, and be none the wiser about what is good for Socrates. If the description identiﬁes an
essential property of the subject, then the description of the function will be useful; for if Socrates is essentially a
human being, then what is good for Socrates must be good for him as what he essentially is, as a human being; and
it must consist in performing human functions in some way.
The parts of animals (1097b30–3; cf. DA 412b17–25) provide essential descriptions, and so are better examples
than craftsmen were. But they are still not perfectly adequate examples, since they are not substances, but have
functions instrumental to the wholes of which they are parts. Craftsmen perform their functions well when they
perform the right actions for some end external to them; and organs perform their functions well in subordination
to the whole that is partly external to them. But unless natural substances are purely instrumental to something
else, this will not be a sufﬁcient account of their function; and if they were purely instrumental, they would not be
substances.
Having illustrated his concept of function from artifacts and organs Aristotle asks if a human being has a function
in the same way. But ‘in the same way’ does not imply that he retains the disputable features of the previous
examples. 1097b28–33 does not involve a fallacy of composition; it is an analogical exposition, to show what
Aristotle has in mind, but is not in itself an argument to show that a human being has a function. The function that
Aristotle seeks for the whole organism is a pattern of goal-directed activity that is essential to the organism in the
way its relation to the whole is essential to the part; but the function of the whole organism is not purely
subordinate to anything else. These issues are clearly discussed in Whiting [AFA].
38. A dog does not have a nutritive soul and a perceptive soul; it has a perceptive soul that is potentially nutritive—a
soul that would perish and turn into a nutritive soul if the dog turned into a vegetable that was alive but unable to
perceive. See 13n25.
39. The genuineness of 1098a3–4 (suspected by Rassow [1874], 72, followed by Stewart [1892] and Gauthier [1970],
ad loc., because of epipeithes, a hapax legomenon in Aristotle) is supported by kai tautês, a5, suggesting that

608

40.

41.

42.
43.
44.
45.

NOTES

something else has just been mentioned as dittôs legomenon. (Rassow admits this, since he suggests the deletion of kai
as yet another gloss.)
If Aristotle identiﬁed the human function with activities performed by nothing else, he would have to exclude
nutrition, perception, desire, and action because these are not peculiar to human beings. On that criterion,
however, plants and animals would not have peculiar functions (since human beings are capable of nutrition and
perception). More probably, the peculiar human function is meant to be the life guided by practical reason. Aristotle
does not claim that just any peculiarity of human beings is their peculiar function; pleasure in purposeless killing, e.
g., will not count. For further discussion see Nagel [1972], 9–11.
If peculiarity is understood this way, we need not follow Kraut [1979] in looking for a type of peculiarity that will
make contemplation, theôria, peculiar to human beings. I do not think the function argument is meant to isolate
contemplation as the peculiar function. Nor do I believe that in EN i or x Aristotle means to identify happiness
with contemplation; I take him to mean that contemplation is the most valuable single component of happiness. If
I am wrong about this, and if Book x does identify happiness with contemplation alone, then it is better to
conclude that the EN is inconsistent (as Cooper does, [1975], 155–77) than to try to make Books i–ix consistent
with a purely contemplative view. That is why I have discussed the rest of the EN without reference to the
questions about happiness in Book x; though they are clearly relevant, I do not think that in fact they ought to
change our minds about the interpretation of the rest of the treatise. For the most plausible views on this
controversial issue see Keyt [1983], Whiting [1986a]. See also 18n24.
A good carpenter does his work well when he does it effectively for the result to which his performance is an
instrumental means; and this is his good qua carpenter. But since the function of a human being is not
instrumental, his good is not success at performing some instrumental task; hence his goodness will not consist in
efﬁciency in performing it, but in the best way of performing his characteristic activities. If we apply Aristotle's
distinction, we can say that the human virtue will be a virtue in action (praxis) rather than production (poiêsis).
The OCT unjustiﬁably deletes 1098a12 anthrôpou . . . houtô a16. In fact a15 makes a crucial move, if eu . . . apoteleitai
refers to good 〉 welfare as the result of good 〉 virtuous action.
On the role of the agent's good in teleological explanation see 15n9, Wallace [1978], ch. 1.
Future-directed desires are not sufﬁcient for rational agency. I need not merely desires focused on the future, but
concern for my future and concern for my future desires.
This sort of problem about deliberation is raised by the case of the Russian noble in Parﬁt [1984], 327, Williams
[1976], 9f.
His argument is this: (1) Being is choiceworthy and beloved for all. (2) We are by being in actuality, since we are by
living and acting 〈which are actualities〉. (3) The product is in a way the producer in actuality. (4) Hence we love
the product because we love being, 1168a5–8.

NOTES

609

The argument combines conative and normative features. In saying that life is ‘choiceworthy’ and ‘beloved’
Aristotle means to imply at least that it is actually loved—otherwise (4) would not follow. But (2) and (3) are not
about what we desire or love, but about what our being really consists in. It consists in our realizing our capacities;
and the more we realize our capacities the more we fulﬁl our desire for being. If ‘choiceworthy’ in (1) implies
‘deserving to be chosen’, Aristotle assumes that what is good for x must be good for x as F if F is what x essentially
is, and hence must be good for x doing what Fs essentially do, hence for x as F in actuality.
46. see § 160.
47. What is distinctive of a dachshund may be bad for these particular dachshunds in so far as they are dogs; hence, if
different essential properties require conﬂicting goods, then appeal to the essence will not be enough to settle on
one beneﬁcial course of action. But we might hope to show that a human being's good as a human being does not
conﬂict with his good as an animal; since his essence as a human being is the rational direction of his activities, we
need not assume in advance (though we cannot exclude the possibility without further examination) that his
activities as an animal will be harmed by the exercise of reason.
48. see § 125.

Chapter 17
1. see § 181.
2. Aristotle needs to claim, and does implicitly claim, that virtue is always the dominant component of happiness,
always to be preferred over any other component or combination of components. If Aristotle can show this, he
can maintain the common-sense belief that virtue involves genuine sacriﬁces and still maintain his own view that
the best policy for happiness is to be virtuous. see § 241.
3. On types of potentiality see § 125.
4. In human beings, as opposed to animals, the non-rational desires are responsive to reason, and these are parts of
the human function, 1098a3–5. Hence they are elements of human virtue in a way that purely vegetative functions
are not, 1102a32–b12. The task of moral education is not merely to subject this part of the soul to practical reason.
We could achieve that result by leaving the non-rational desires as strong as they naturally are and learning to
frustrate them (as the continent person does), or (cf. 1146a9–16) by weakening of the non-rational appetites until
they do not bother us when we rationally choose not to satisfy them. Neither of these results will satisfy Aristotle.
For each may involve the suppression of one essential aspect of human nature in the service of another; and in that
case virtue will not complete human nature as a whole.
5. Though Aristotle does not use Plato's political analogy here, he seems to have in mind the sort of view that Plato
expresses through his account of psychic justice. The rational agent will properly consider his plan from the

610

6.

7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

NOTES

point of view of his non-rational impulses. In forming impulses so that they agree with reason, we also educate
reason so that it agrees with impulse. This education is necessary if a virtue of character is to complete the whole of
human nature in the way Aristotle claims.
McDowell [1980], 369f, and [1978], 27–9, suggests that if a virtuous person has to give up, e.g., some appetitive
satisfaction, he does not regard himself as having any reason (even prima facie) to pursue the satisfaction, and
therefore suffers no loss by giving it up. To attribute such a view to Aristotle seems to me to assimilate him too
closely to the insensible person's view. A person would not be more virtuous if she performed mixed actions
without regret (since the regret might indicate that she owes apology or compensation); it is not clear why
‘silencing’ is any more appropriate in McDowell's case.
When Aristotle says that good deliberation is correctness about what promotes the end correctly grasped by
wisdom (1142b32–3; see 15n24), we should not assume that deliberation contributes nothing to the correct grasp
of the end. On the contrary; the wise person's correct grasp must say more than that the end is happiness
(everyone agrees about that), and his correct grasp must result from deliberation (since that is what the wise person
does). His task is therefore very similar to the task that Aristotle sets himself in the Ethics; that is why Aristotle
claims to be practising political science, which is the same state of character as wisdom.
The relation between virtue and self-love is helpfully discussed by Homiak [1981], relying on a more conative
conception of happiness than the one I have ascribed to Aristotle.
‘In himself ’, kath'hauton; cf. 1156a10–11. Cf. ‘because of himself ’, di'hauton, 1156b10, and ‘in so far as he is who he
is’, 1156a17–18.
If Ann became a god, the god would be her replacement, not her continuation, and hence Al does not wish this
further good to Ann, 1159a5–11. Aristotle suggests further that I must remain not only a human being rather than
a god, but also the particular human being I am, 1166a19–22 (retaining ekeino to genomenon, a21, deleted in OCT,
and taking genomenos d'allos, a20, to refer to becoming another person, not simply to becoming a god).
See §§ 137, 183.
If this is Aristotle's view of a particular self and essence, we will expect him to claim that if Ann's character could
change and she could lose her virtue, then Al's friendship for her would cease. We can see that Aristotle believes
this when he discusses the actual cases that are most closely analogous—those in which we believe a friend is
virtuous and he turns out not to be. If we suppose someone is good, and he turns out vicious and seems so, then
we cannot keep on loving him in the same way; ‘for it was not to that sort of person that he was a friend’,
1165b21–2. In these conditions the friend who breaks off the friendship ‘would seem to be doing nothing absurd’,
1165b21. In one way we might think the same person evidently persists, and so the same person persists to be
loved for her own sake. But this is not the individual self Ann whom Al loved for herself in the ﬁrst place.

NOTES

12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.

19.
20.

611

I speak of ‘persistence’ so as to avoid the implications of identity (so that, e.g., if identity cannot be a matter of
degree, it will not follow that persistence cannot be). This is one of Parﬁt's reasons for distinguishing survival from
identity, [1984], 298f.
He may be sorry for what happened, since things may not turn out as he expected them to, and to that extent he
may be sorry for not having done something other than what he did. But he will not wish that, believing what he
believed at the time, he had made some different decision.
In 1166b12 I read pepraktai dia (kai dia, OCT) and misousi te kai (misountai kai, OCT).
Incontinents are contrasted with both virtuous and vicious people at 1102b14–28, 1146b22–4, 1150b29–1151a10,
1152a4–6. Annas [1977], 541, 553f, suggests that ix 4 violates the usual contrast.
For similar reasons, the case of the half-bad, but not irreparably bad, person shows that mere preservation of the
present self is not overridingly important. For if such a person is to become better, he must change quite radically,
and so lose much of his present self. This does not mean he ought not to change in his own interest. For he will
not really manage to preserve himself if he refuses to reform. If he is concerned with external goods above all, he
will have to adapt himself to changing conditions; he will have no stable character if he keeps on as he is or if he
becomes thoroughly intemperate. The fact that a half-bad person must change and partly destroy himself is part of
the reason why he is in a bad condition; being who he is is not good for him, so that aiming at what is good for
him is a self-contradictory aim. One of the bad features of his condition is his inability both to be a good person
and to achieve his good to the extent that a virtuous person achieves it. Aristotle sometimes says that what is good
without qualiﬁcation is good for the good person but not good for everyone, EE 1248b26–7. The bad person
cannot fully achieve his own good; he must ﬁrst become someone else.
Exclusive attachment to rational agency might be attributed to Socrates, the Cynics, and (on some views) the
Stoics. Fixed attachments seem typical of a tragic character such as Ajax. See Irwin [1985].
On the ﬁne, kalon, see § 237.
Hence Aristotle claims that the intemperate person thinks ‘he must always seek the pleasant thing in front of him’,
1146b22–3. This feature of the intemperate person makes him slavish, andrapodôdês; see §§ 220, 246. The natural
slave lacks the capacity to deliberate about his life as a whole, and can only live for the satisfaction of immediate
desires; hence he is incapable of happiness, EN 1177a6–9. The intemperate person is capable of this deliberation,
but decides not to rely on it in the conduct of his life. He differs from the natural slave in that his reason assents to
the neglect of reason in his life.
This description of prudent vice is derived from Plato, Phd. 68d–69c, Rep. 365c, 554a–555a, Phdr. 256e.
This account of virtue allows us to understand more of Aristotle's views on incontinence. (The brief suggestions
here are developed slightly in Irwin [1986].)

612

21.
22.
23.

24.

NOTES

An imperfectly trained person will be incontinent, or at best continent. The incontinent tends to lapse from
acceptance of the virtuous person's outlook to acceptance of the intemperate person's. He agrees that it is worth
pursuing goals beyond the goals of appetite, and makes the right decisions. But when his appetites are especially
strong he is no longer convinced that he has reason to act on his conception of his happiness. He relapses into
doing what he has the strongest impulse for, not because he accepts the intemperate person's conception of
happiness, but because he is not convinced that he has good reason to rely on his own conception of happiness.
When he abandons his policy of acting on his conception of happiness, he acts incontinently. The temperate
person is better off than the incontinent in so far as his rational desire controls his actions. It controls him because
he sees more clearly the reasons for following his conception of his ﬁnal good against the inducements of his
appetites; and because he sees this clearly he has been able to train his appetites so that they do not conﬂict with his
rational desires as they do in the incontinent person.
On 1098a18–20 see Irwin [1985], 104f. 1101a11–17 shows that a lifetime is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for a
complete life, and that a complete life must include the right sorts of virtuous activities.
On the vulgar and the menial see § 22.
‘Nameless’ states are discussed at 1107b1–2, 1107b30–1108a1, 1108a16–19, 1125b17–29, 1127a11–17. Aristotle
shows that namelessness is not accidental. Sometimes a state has no standard name because it rarely or never
occurs; but sometimes people simply have not seen the possibility of a mean state in relation to a particular
emotion or external good.
In explaining the doctrine of the mean with reference to types of rational control I try to meet some of the
challenge presented by Hursthouse [1980] to Urmson [1973].

Chapter 18
1. In the Republic Plato admits that justice is the hardest of the commonly recognized virtues to defend within a
theory that tries to relate all the virtues to happiness. It is unfortunate that Aristotle does not say how he intends to
answer Plato's problem. But unless he can answer it, his theory will have failed one reasonable test of adequacy.
2. The initial claim about friendship in 1155b31–4 suggests that each of the three types of friendship, for the good,
the advantageous, and the pleasant, should involve active goodwill, 1156a3–5. But this appearance may be
misleading, since it conﬂicts with Aristotle's later remark that goodwill is not found in the lower friendships,
1167a10–14. We can remove the conﬂict if we attend to Aristotle's claims about the place of goodwill in each type
of friendship. Friends wish good to the other in the respect in which they love him; hence friends for advantage
love the other ‘not in accordance with himself 〈i.e. not in so far as he is who he is in himself〉, but in so far
as they

NOTES

613

will get some good from him. Similarly also for those who love because of pleasure; for they like a witty person not
because he is the sort of person he is 〈or: has the character he has〉, but because he is pleasant to themselves’,
1156a10–16. Aristotle tries to explain why full altruistic concern is conﬁned to the best type of friendship by
explaining (a) ‘for his own sake’ or (b) ‘because of himself ’ as (c) ‘because he is the person he is’, 1156a16 (where I
agree with Gauthier ad loc. in following Bonitz's suggestion, hê(i) ho philoumenos estin 〈hosper estin〉), a17–18, and
(d) ‘because he is who he essentially is’. He then explains ‘the person he is’ as (e) ‘the sort of person he is’ and (f)
‘the sort of character he has’. This account of altruistic concern and of the virtuous people's friendship explains
why such friendship fully embodies altruistic concern and the others do not, 1156b7–12.
Cooper [1977], 629–43, relies on the initial remarks about goodwill to argue that all three types of friendship
display intrinsic concern for the other. I think he underestimates the restrictions implied by the later remarks. A
position between Cooper's and mine is well defended by Alpern [1983], 307–10.
3. Aristotle sees no special difﬁculty in the degree of goodwill that he associates with friendships for pleasure and
advantage. Since these friendships have goodwill limited by the prospects of pleasure and advantage, the goodwill
has a clear instrumental justiﬁcation. Such goodwill may extend to other aspects of the person beyond those
directly involved in the pleasure or advantage. Someone will be a better friend for advantage or pleasure to the
extent that he is a better person, hence more capable of the best kind of friendship. See n28. The self-conﬁned
egoist, concerned with no one for his own sake besides himself, may therefore discover that an altruist, whose
concerns are not conﬁned to himself, is better at securing his own advantage. It does not follow that the selfconﬁned egoist who sees this can at once make himself altruistic. For while he might like to believe that other
people matter for their own sakes, he may still see no good reason to believe this, and awareness of the good
consequences of the belief may not be enough to make him hold it. We still need to know why anyone has good
reason to be concerned for others in the way characteristic of the best sort of friendship.
4. It is important that the attitude to be justiﬁed is metaphysical, not simple, altruism. Common sense assumes that
we have the right sentiments for simple altruism, but it does not explain why we should have them, or justify them
to someone who doubts that they are a necessary part of the human good. A critic can still raise these doubts even
if simple altruism is a natural psychological tendency of ours; he can still fairly ask whether its satisfaction is a
prominent part of our good.
Simple altruism requires us to count the other person's desire for some good as a reason for giving him that good;
but we still want to know how strong a reason his desire should be for us, and how far we should cultivate this
tendency to take other people's desires to give us reasons for our own actions. The critic might argue that we ought
to weaken, not to cultivate, this tendency, because it interferes with the rational pursuit of our good;

614

5.

6.

7.
8.
9.
10.

NOTES

perhaps we will satisfy some of our other desires more fully if we inhibit our altruistic desires. Common sense has
no answer if it accepts a conative account of our good. If we reject a conative account, the critic's question returns.
Even if we have strong altruistic desires, and their satisfaction does not seriously interfere with the satisfaction of
our other strong desires, how do we know that satisfaction of these desires achieves our good? Since he accepts a
normative conception of the good as realization of human capacities, Aristotle needs to justify altruism on
metaphysical grounds that do not simply appeal to the psychological naturalness of simple altruism. On self-love
and the love of others see Engberg-Pederson [1983], ch. 2.
In ix 7 Aristotle examines the popular view that the beneﬁts of friendship all consist in receiving the
beneﬁts—beneﬁts of the sort that a self-conﬁned egoist will appreciate. The disadvantages of friendship are the
services that I have to do to get the beneﬁts. Hence the rational person, it seems, has to calculate the relation of the
recipient's beneﬁts to the benefactor's burdens. Aristotle rejects this popular view, and argues that the more
important beneﬁts of friendship consist in giving rather than receiving, so that the popular method of calculation
rests on a false assumption.
MM 1213a10–26 and EE 1245a29–37 appeal to the friend as a mirror in whom I can contemplate myself better;
and Cooper [1980], 320–4, takes this to be one of Aristotle's two best defences of friendship (and he also ﬁnds it in
EN 1169b28–1170a4). But this heuristic function of a friend does not seem to be enough. For would another
virtuous person sufﬁciently like me not do just as well, even if I lacked the causal connexions with his thoughts and
actions that are essential for friendship? It is not clear why I would have to be concerned for the friend's good if I
wanted him to be a mirror for me. He might be another self in one sense (someone sufﬁciently similar to me), but
not in the sense relevant to altruistic concern (one whom I care about in the way I care about myself).
The argument of 1170a13ff is partly anticipated in EE 1244b21–1245a26. But Aristotle now entirely removes the
claims about the mirror, and so radically changes the role of the other self. He is no longer simply a means for me
to contemplate my own actions better. He is a further source of actions that I can enjoy contemplating for
themselves in the same way as I contemplate my own. The other self is an extension of my own activity, not simply
a means for me to see my own unextended activity.
see § 205.
see § 141.
In Kahn's view, [1981a], 34–40, the ‘self ’ that is involved is the nous shared by all human beings. This view makes it
hard to see how a distinct individual (cf. ‘another Heracles’, MM 1213a10–13, EE 1245a29–35), as opposed to
some feature that all human individuals share, could be the object of love.
On political friendship see EE 1242b25–37, Pol. 1295b21–5, Cooper [1977], 645–8. Barker [1906], 236, notices
that the conception of a friend as another self is important for the theory of the state: ‘Now friendship means that
a man regards his friend as “another self ”, for whom, exactly as if he were

NOTES

615

himself, he wishes and does all that is good for his own sake . . . The conception of a common good, the
conception that the good of another is one's own good, these things are thus the essence of friendship, as they are
of the State. If the State is to have political fellowship, it must possess the virtue of friendship.’ Barker quite
reasonably assumes some connexion between the ‘other self ’ (characteristic of the best sort of friendship) and the
political friendship in a state; but he does not explain how the connexion is to be demonstrated.
11. The child is the parent's other self because he is scarcely separate from the parent, and for this reason the parent
ﬁnds the child's actions very closely related to the parent's thoughts and deliberations. Isaac loves Jacob not just
because he is another person but because Jacob is specially related to Isaac himself, and therefore Isaac comes to
regard Jacob's good as part of his own, as something ‘of his own’ or ‘akin’, oikeion. Aristotle explains that the
product is ‘made akin’ to the producer, that the producer regards it as his own, 1161b19–24. Isaac is aware of
Jacob as his product, continuing some of Isaac's characteristics; Isaac is interested in the success of his plans and
designs and the results of his own causal agency. This is what makes craftsmen fond of their products,
1120b13–14, 1167b33–1168a9. Aristotle implies that the more of Isaac's efforts and rational agency are associated
with Jacob the more Isaac will be concerned with Jacob. If Isaac wanted a child and intended to have a child, and
having the child is related to Isaac's other plans, we expect Isaac to have a stronger concern for Jacob than
otherwise. And we expect the concern to be strengthened the more Isaac sees of Jacob and the more he ﬁnds
Jacob dependent on him. Aristotle is aware of these sources of concern; he mentions them to explain why mothers
love children more than fathers do (despite his striking and objectionable tendency to speak of paternal love as the
paradigm of parental love), and how love grows between brothers, 1161b26, 1161b33–1162a1, 1168a24–6.
The child is less of another self than the virtuous friend is; he does not share the parent's aims because he has freely
and rationally accepted them, but because, at this stage, he has no developed aims and goals that are independent
of the parent's. He is perhaps more like an extension of the parent than a genuinely other self. Moreover, familial
friendship results from a relation that is independent of and prior to the friendship. A father's natural and social
relations to his child make it reasonable for him to regard the child's interest as part of his own, and hence to care
about the child for the child's own sake. The best kind of friendship needs a special explanation just because it
requires disinterested goodwill with no antecedent natural or social relation that make it reasonable. In the best
friendship the character of the other in himself, not his antecedent relation to me, has to be the ground of the
friendship.
12. If the city is self-sufﬁcient and complete, it includes within itself all the activities that constitute happiness and the
necessary means for them, including the right number of people, 1261b11–15. (These will be necessary conditions
rather than parts; see 1278a2–6, 1291a23–33, 1326a16–21,

616

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

NOTES

1328a21–b4, 1329a34–9, EE 1214b14–27.) Once it has reached this stage it need not grow any further, but has
reached its proper natural limit; see n15.
The demand for similarity in 1295b21–7 is consistent with the demand for dissimilarity in 1261a22–b15,
1277a5–12, if Aristotle is right in supposing that the second demand is met by citizens of similar virtue who are
willing to occupy different roles at different times.
See 1276a27–30, 1324b9–11, 1325a7–10, 1326b3–5, on the nation, ethnos.
On the proper limit see Pol. 1256b31–9, 1326a35–b11, PA 646b7–10, GA 745a4–9, 760a33–5, 776a3–6,
777b26–30, DC 268a21–2, EN 1170b31–3. On limit and completeness see DC 286b18–23.
He could consistently agree that a larger community (e.g. a nation or alliance of cities) is needed to secure some
necessary conditions for the parts of happiness. His claim about the completeness of the city rests on deeper
grounds than the lack of distinct Greek words for city and state (mentioned by Newman [1887], i.40).
HA 488a7–10 (cf. 588b30–589a2) makes a common function sufﬁcient for being a political animal—a weaker
condition than the one assumed in the Ethics and Politics (for which cf. 488b24–5). Mulgan [1974] discusses
488a7–10, but not 488b24–5, which makes clear the limited degree to which the other animals are political (and if
we allow this, we need not speak of ‘two senses’ of politikon, as Mulgan does). For further discussion see Brandt
[1974], 191–6, Kullmann [1980].
On voice, pleasure, and pain in animals see DA 420b32, PA 660a35–b2, HA 588b27–30, 608a17–21.
The passage i, quoted in § 210.
I take ‘for every day’ in 1252b13 to be parallel to ‘for more than a day’, b16, and so to indicate (cf. EN 1162a20–2)
the permanence of the household. Newman, ii. 112, takes the two phrases to mark a contrast.
See 16n35.
I take tauta in 1280b40 to refer to the smaller communities. Newman, iii. 209, on b38 underestimates the role of
friendship in the argument, by suggesting that its end is simply to be contrasted with the end of the city; b39–40
implies that it also helps to identify the end of the city.
See n12.
In Pol. vii Aristotle adds something to his remarks in the EN (see 16n40) about theoretical study. He considers the
claims of (a) the citizen's life and (b) the life of theoretical study, to achieve happiness, 1324a13–35. But he also
discusses two conﬂicting accounts of the political life: (b1) the despotic life, ruling over fellow-citizens or
foreigners alike, with or without their consent; (b2) the non-aggressive life, sharing in the ruling ofﬁces but not
grabbing them, and not seeking despotic rule over others.
Aristotle ﬁrst rejects (b1) in favour of (b2), 1324b32–1325a15, 1325a34–b14. He does not want us to decide in
favour of the theoretical over the political life because we confuse the political with the despotic life. He explains
that the good achieved in the political life does not depend on the power and security that results from ruling
others, 1325a7–10, b3–14, 1328a35–7.

NOTES

25.
26.

27.

28.

617

In returning to (a) and (b2), the relative claims of the theoretical and the political life, Aristotle suggests his own
settlement of the dispute. (1) The critics of the political life would be right if it were the despotic life; but it is not.
And they are wrong to suggest that inactivity is better than activity, 1325a31–4. (2) The critics of the theoretical life
are wrong to suppose that it requires inactivity. For someone can be active without acting in relation to others, and
the theorist's thoughts are active in any sense that is required when we speak of happiness as a good activity,
1325b16–21.
We cannot have a complete life if it excludes intrinsic goods; and Aristotle allows that just and temperate people
achieve intrinsic goods in their actions, 1325a32–4. Since the theorist does not achieve these goods by theoretical
study alone, he does not achieve a complete and self-sufﬁcient good. Equally, the active citizen does not achieve in
his political activities the good that the theorist achieves, and hence does not achieve the complete good either. It is
reasonable to conclude that the best life includes both theoretical study and the actions characteristic of the moral
virtues. I believe that this is Aristotle's conclusion in the EE and EN as well. On leisure see 19n13.
This is the case of necessity mentioned in Met. 1015a22–6.
The organic aspects of Aristotle's conception of the state are discussed by Barker [1906], 225f, 276–81 (including
some justiﬁed criticism). Barker's discussion would be clearer if he distinguished the claims about the organic
character of the state that follow from Aristotle's teleological doctrines from those that do not. See further Mulgan
[1977], 32.
To simplify things so far, we have assumed that citizens know a little about each other, and in particular know that
all of them are virtuous. These conditions may be relaxed further while still allowing some other-regarding
concern; but in fact Aristotle is anxious not to dilute the demands for virtue, mutual knowledge, and cooperation
too much. He insists on strict limits on the number of citizens, so that they will know something about each other,
Pol. 1326b12–18. He wants them to be not too disparate in virtue, and for this reason wants artisans to be
disqualiﬁed from citizenship as far as possible, 1328b34–1329a2. His conception of citizenship is further evidence
that he intends something like the justiﬁcation of extended altruism that we have described.
It follows that in a city (or other community resting on altruism) friendship for advantage will be different from
what it will be in other conditions. If Al and Dora are friends for advantage, but not friends of the best type, but
are concerned with each other's welfare as fellow-citizens, then Al can rely on Dora to be just; she will be guided by
her own interests in laying down the terms of the friendship and will not treat Al as she might treat Ed, her friend
of the best type; but the extent of her pursuit of her own advantage will be regulated by the concern for fellowcitizens that makes her just. If citizens are just, they will be able to make the sorts of bargains that other people
might ﬁnd risky, in particular the agreements that rest on a person's character (cf. EN 1162b21–1163a1). Since
they are just people, they have a further reason for fulﬁlling the terms of the bargain, and for caring about

618

NOTES

the other for the other's own sake. In EN viii–ix Aristotle describes the secondary types of friendship by
themselves, not considering the further motives that just people have for conducting such friendships with some
intrinsic concern for the other.

Chapter 19
1. The ideal state should not be a fantasy. Since it is supposed to display the political system that achieves the human
good, it should not assume impossible external conditions or a fantastic change in human nature. Apart from this
restriction, Aristotle is not worried about the immediate feasibility of the best city. He helps himself to all the
natural resources we might pray for, 1260b27–9, 1288b22–4, 1325b33–40, and is unmoved by the difﬁculty of
introducing the institutions of the ideal city in any empirically likely situation; only an impossibility is rejected (cf.
1263a30–40). Since the realization of the human good depends on speciﬁc and fairly demanding external
conditions, these must be assumed in the account of the ideal state.
2. On assumptions see 20n16.
3. See 21n14. In particular cases Aristotle remarks that concern for wealth caused the deviation of the Carthaginian
constitution from aristocracy, 1273a31–b1, and the Spartan obsession with military virtue is responsible for the
shape of Sparta's political system, 1324b3–12.
4. We might say that ‘freedom’ is used in two senses: (a) for someone whose legal status makes him free, not a slave;
(b) for lack of restraint over us in living our lives. Aristotle tries to show how they are connected.
Democrats did not usually argue that everyone should have an equal share of everything; not many of them
actually redistributed the lands and wealth of the rich (cf. 1281a14–19, 1318a11–26).
5. On freedom see § 225.
6. see § 214.
7. See the objections to the Republic, 1264b15–25, 1329a21–6.
8. See 3n10 on homonymy.
9. At 1275b17–20 Aristotle says that in oligarchies mere eligibility for ofﬁce is the extent to which citizens hold the
‘indeﬁnite rule’ that is taken to deﬁne citizenship, 1275a31–3. He could have replaced his initial deﬁnition with a
more obviously comprehensive deﬁnition that referred simply to eligibility; but he refuses to do this, since the
second deﬁnition would not make clear that oligarchies show an inferior degree of citizenship.
10. His account of friends in the EN provides a partial parallel. The deﬁnition of the best kind of friendship explains
why the lower forms are also called friendships; they have some of the features that are combined in the best form,
and the presence of these features in the best form explains what is good about the inferior forms,
1156b33–1157a3, 1157a25–33. The hierarchy explains why we call all these people friends, but at the same time

NOTES

11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

619

think that the best friendship is a more complete friendship than the other two. The best friendship best displays
the place of friendship in happiness, and by doing this displays the good of the other friendships too. see § 209.
In non-ideal states the good citizen is not the same as the good man without qualiﬁcation, 1293b1–6; these states
try, justiﬁably, to make good citizens in relation to a particular political system, 1309a36–9.
This is a serious qualiﬁcation of 1255b12–18. On this point rule over slaves resembles tyranny, 1311a2–4; and this
resemblance explains some of what is wrong with tyranny.
On leisure see 1326b26–32 (associated with self-sufﬁciency), 1333a30–b5, 1334a2–40, 1337b28–32; cf.
1269a34–6, 1273a24–5 (leisure requires wealth), 1329a1–2, 1341a28. For the wrong sort of people leisure is
not always good, and in some conditions Aristotle agrees with political measures to reduce it, 1292b28, 1293a5,
1313b25, 1318b12. On leisure see Stocks [1936], Solmsen [1964]. Both of them attribute to Aristotle a more
radical withdrawal from political activities than he seems to think necessary for the leisured life. (Hence Stocks
compares Aristotle's remarks with Plato, Tht. 172–7, assuming that Aristotle advocates the same sort of
withdrawal; this leads him into some unwarranted speculations about the chronology of the Pol.) There is no
reason to think that Aristotle takes freedom from ‘necessary’ occupations to require freedom from, or a bare
minimum of, moral and political activity; indeed, such a view makes his conception of the citizen in the ideal state
hard to understand.
On a Stoic conception of freedom see Epictetus, Disc. iv 1.62–75.
see § 195.
On the menial and the slavish character see §246, 1277a35, 1334a39, 1336b11–12, 1342a18–28, EN 1095b19,
1118a25–6, b20–1, 1126a7–8, 1128a20–2, EE 1231b10–26, Rhet. 1387b12.
On contested goods see §210.
The passage is quoted in §216.
The farmer's life might be all right in itself, but simply takes up too much time, but the other occupations are
positively harmful. This is why Aristotle thinks an agricultural lower class is the safest for a democracy, since it
lacks leisure but does not have its virtue sapped, 1318b9–16.
The most menial crafts are those that injure the body most, the most servile those that involve most use of the
body, and the most ignoble those that have least need of virtue, 1258b37–9. Though these are the most menial,
others are menial too if they damage a person's intellect; these include wage-earning activities, since these make the
intellect unleisured and humble, 1337b8–15. We call a pursuit menial when it is pursued for the sake of payment by
a customer, 1341b10–18. This view of menial occupations explains why Aristotle often associates them with being
a hired labourer, thês, 1278a12, 17, 21, 1296b29, 1317a25, 1319a27, 1341b13, 1342a20. A hired labourer works for
wages paid him by someone else; this in itself is menial, since it leaves him at the beck and call of another, Rhet.
1367a32–3. The work he does will usually damage his body, because it is hard physical labour, Rhet. 1367a30–2;
and since this requires little virtue, it

620

NOTES

will also be servile and ignoble. On the other hand, someone can be menial without being a hired labourer, if he
single-mindedly devotes all his energies to making a proﬁt, or even to securing some other goal besides the life of
virtue; hence the Spartans are condemned as menial because they devote themselves single-mindedly to cultivating
a militaristic character to secure their city's domination over others, 1338b32–6; cf. 1334a41–b4. (Aristotle's
attitude contrasts sharply with that expressed in Plutarch, Ages. 26.5, quoted by Newman, iii.342.)
At one point Aristotle suggests that the only difference between menial and slavish functions is that the menial
does not belong to a single householder, 1278a11–13. A menial works like a slave for part of his life, though he is
not wholly at another's disposal, and hence has a limited slavery, 1260a36–b2, because he performs slavish
services, 1277a35–b7. The presence of menial workers is responsible for the poor quality of the lower classes in
some states, 1326a16–25, 1319a24–32; Aristotle thinks that in some states the masses are slavish, 1282a15,
sometimes practically no better than beasts, 1281b18.
On menial occupations see De Ste Croix [1981], 182–5.
20. To see that this is not a mere optimistic fantasy we might consider a historical example familiar to Aristotle. The
increasing political role of the Athenian demos was partly a result of the material security provided by Solonian
reforms. Aristotle suggests that menial labour makes someone's mind ‘unleisured and abased’, 1337b14–15; but
abasement hardly seems characteristic of the Athenian demos. Quite the contrary; Aristotle thinks it is safer if the
demos are more abased by menial labour, so that they must always struggle for necessities, 1318b9–16. When they
have more leisure, the menials start to hold assemblies and to want a role in government, 1319a24–32; cf.
1292b25–9, 1293a1–10. Aristotle does not explain why these slavish, menial, nearly bestial people should take
advantage of increased leisure to start holding assemblies, rather than to satisfy their slavish lusts for gain or
sensual pleasure. See §246.
21. If the necessary work is not done by citizens, it might be done by (a) machines—only a mythological possibility for
Aristotle, 1253b33–1254a1; (b) natural slaves; (c) other non-citizens; (d) citizens. To justify (b) Aristotle should
show that (i) a natural slave is beneﬁted, or at least not harmed, by working as a slave, or that (ii) a natural slave's
interests need not be considered, any more than a machine's, then he can advise the ideal city to employ natural
slaves.
Aristotle does not try (ii), since he clearly thinks natural slaves have interests, and he is ready to say that it is in the
slave's interest to be ruled by a master with the rational capacities that the slave lacks, 1254b19–20, 1255b4–15. We
may agree so far, however, without agreeing with the further claim Aristotle needs—that it is in the slave's interest
to do menial work for his master under the conditions that will make him a proﬁtable investment for his master;
1278b36–7 offers the slave rather limited protection.
If Aristotle favours (b), 1330a23–8, though, it is puzzling that he suggests that freedom should always be offered to
slaves as a prize or reward,

NOTES

22.
23.

24.
25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

621

1330a31–3. If these are natural slaves, it is not clear why they should want freedom. But even if they do come to
want it, how could it be in their interest?
Sometimes Aristotle supports (c), 1328b5–23, 1329a35–7, 1330a28–30; since the labourers are not natural slaves, it
is not clear what justiﬁes their serfdom or other inferior status, or why (c) is preferable to (d).
Aristotle criticizes Plato for producing two cities, when the producers lack the appropriate moral education and are
left in control of production, 1264a13–40. Will Aristotle's ideal city, with non-citizen producers, not be even more
exposed to these criticisms?
Aristotle agrees that the single-minded pursuit of a military way of life will make someone menial, slavish, and
bestial, 1334a36–b4, 1338b29–36; cf. 1271a40–b10. However, the danger that military life will produce a menial
character does not persuade Aristotle to prescribe a specialized military class for the ideal city, even though the
contemporary practice of employing mercenaries would make this entirely conceivable for him. His reason for
wanting the soldiers to be citizens is clear and plausible; those who control the arms also control the stability of the
political system, and it would be foolish to take the risk involved in allowing non-citizens to be soldiers, 1329a7–17.
The possible bad effects of the military way of life do not dissuade Aristotle from wanting citizens to be soldiers.
He might argue that the dangers are avoidable if the troops are properly educated and properly led. But these
arguments for citizen soldiers seem to be quite good arguments for citizen workers too.
See §§ 213–14.
Aristotle needs to defend one or both of these empirical claims: (1) Manual work is so much more destructive than
military service is for virtue that citizens must not be exposed to it. (2) Manual workers are so much less dangerous
than soldiers that we need not impose on citizens the burden of menial work even though we must impose the
burden of military service on them.
Neither of these empirical claims is very plausible; and (1) without (2) would simply force us into an awkward
dilemma. If (2) is false, then Aristotle must admit that his ethical principles require the citizens to share menial
labour.
Aristotle's views on the function of the state are criticized, on highly disputable liberal grounds, by Robinson
[1962], p. xxiii. His argument for moral education is criticized by Mulgan [1977], 26.
See 1102a7–13, 1103b2–6, 1109b34–5, 1113b21–6, 1177b12–15, MM 1187a14–18, Pol. 1263a39–40,
1283b35–1284a3, 1332a28–b11. No similar concern is evident in the EE.
See 1293b12–14, 1330b32–3, 1280b5–6, contrasting states (e.g. Sparta) that have a conscious programme of public
education with those that do not.
Nozick [1974], ch. 10, esp. 309–12, argues that the minimal state previously justiﬁed by appeal to rights and justice
is also a framework for utopia, because it offers better prospects than a non-minimal state would offer for its
members to achieve their good.
Those who suppose that the city should accumulate material wealth

622

NOTES

without limit confuse the conditions of mere living with those of living well, 1257b40–1258a1, 1280a31–2, or else
they rely on a false conception of happiness, 1258a2–14. Seeing happiness in the sort of gratiﬁcation that requires
the use of material goods, and seeing no limit to the gratiﬁcation, they set no limit on accumulation either. On this
view economic activity will not be designed as a means to the right kind of political activity—providing the citizen
with enough leisure for politics; instead political activity will be merely instrumental to accumulation. It will either
be a direct source of proﬁt through public ofﬁce, as in Carthage, 1273a21–b5, or an indirect source, in so far as the
laws and constitution make it easier for one class to proﬁt from another; the rich are unrestrained in an oligarchy,
and the poor live off the rich in an extreme democracy.
Many cities have been protected from the results of their errors about happiness because they have been less than
unanimous or because they have been unsystematic in its pursuit. Indeed, the recognition of a single good and its
systematic pursuit will often be a source of conﬂict; if both the oligarchs and the democrats ﬁnd happiness in the
gratiﬁcation that requires wealth, their unanimity will force them into further conﬂict. That is because wealth is a
‘contested good’ (see 1271b7–9, §210).
The Spartans have been the most self-conscious and efﬁcient in organizing the city to achieve their shared goals.
But the goals have been the usual ones; they have wanted to secure the contested goods, and have decided that
military virtue is the way to secure them, 1271a40–b10. Since they have had no true conception of happiness, they
have had no true conception of a city's proper tasks, and so they have made their city into a barracks.
31. Aristotle agrees that if there is no deliberate public education, then parents may have to do what they can by
themselves, EN 1180a24–32. But if private citizens agree with the basic assumption of the political system, then
the city will do more efﬁciently what they do.
The city forms character and habits by its laws or the lack of them. It forms character no less by the honours and
rewards offered for and in political activity. When wealth, good birth, military or rhetorical ability, is the
qualiﬁcation for public ofﬁce, different aims and characters will be formed. In so far as the city has other ways to
bestow praise, honour, blame, and disgrace, it encourages the growth of the corresponding characters.
32. Aristotle recognizes a reciprocal relation between the characters of citizens and the nature of the political system,
1337a11–27. But some cities allow their unconscious formation of characters to threaten the system, and this is
what we should expect when they are founded on a partly false conception of happiness. A system that extends its
inherent defects into defective characters in its citizens will threaten its own stability; hence the one-sided pursuit of
the conception of happiness that underlies an oligarchy or a democracy will eventually threaten the oligarchic or
democratic system itself, 1310a12–38. To maintain itself, the system needs to form characters that will suit the
constitution, since without them it will ﬁnd survival difﬁcult, 1292b11–21, 1319b1–4. See §248.

NOTES

623

33. see § 220.
34. see § 217.
35. The choice that a citizen makes in maturity is a choice of a common moral education that he has to have begun
long before he is able to make a choice about it. Being a virtuous person, he is pleased that the previous generation
chose a political and social system that imposed this moral education on him. It is not a restriction of his freedom;
for it is the system that he rationally prefers to have imposed on him. Nor does it constrain him more than any
other early life would have constrained him. Conscientious refusal to impose moral education seems to Aristotle to
rest on a false conception of the alternatives. Someone who grows up untrained is simply exposed to the social
pressures resulting from the city's institutions and practices, and has his desires ill-equipped for becoming virtuous.
36. Aristotle does not imply an unthinking endorsement of every political system that tries to perpetuate itself by moral
education. In 1310a12–36 he thinks the preferable route to stability is the route that will make a political system
better, and that hence the preferable form of education will encourage some degree of genuine virtue. see § 248.
37. On the importance of freedom and initiative for the virtuous person's prohairesis see Allan [1965a], 68. On
democratic freedom see Mulgan [1970].
38. On arbitration see § 189.

Chapter 20
1. To show that general justice is the whole of virtue Aristotle argues:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Justice is what legislative science prescribes.
Laws (i.e. the products of legislative science) aim at the common beneﬁt in all they prescribe.
Hence justice secures the common beneﬁt by promoting happiness and its parts for the community.
Laws prescribe actions required by all the virtues.
Hence justice is the whole of virtue in relation to another, 1129b11–27.

Since legislative science is the same as political science, which is practical wisdom aiming at the good of the
community, 1141b23–33 (cf. 1094a27–b10), we can agree with Aristotle's claim that legislative science aims at the
good of the community. Hence the commonly recognized connexion between law and justice is intelligible. It is
wrong to say that whatever a positive law prescribes is thereby just; bad constitutions and bad laws fail to achieve
the common beneﬁt, and hence fail to achieve justice, 1129b24–5. However, it is true to say that what is lawful,
nomimon, is in a way just, 1129b12. For what is lawful is what is prescribed by legislative science, and this, unlike
positive law, will aim at the common good. Positive laws approximate to justice in so far as they coincide with the
provisions of legislative science.

624

2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

NOTES

If (5) is to follow, (4) must mean that the laws seek to make citizens virtuous, not simply to make them do the
actions that a virtuous person would do. Unless I am a virtuous person who sees how the other-regarding aspects
of the virtues promote my good, I will be less rationally convinced of the appropriateness of just actions. I will not
value just action for its own sake unless I can relate it to my happiness and hence to the other virtues; and if I value
it only instrumentally, I cannot be trusted to do the just action in conditions where the just person will gladly do it.
The same point applies to the other-regarding aspects of each virtue of character.
Allan [1965a], 62–72, argues for a more restricted view of the functions of law. On the serious issues he raises
about compulsion see § 227.
On the same state with two different ‘beings’ see 13n21.
A rather over-simpliﬁed and one-sided consequentialist account of Aristotle is offered by Miller [1981].
The competitive aspects of pleonexia are captured in a translation such as ‘overreaching’, ‘outdoing’, ‘getting the
better’. When Aristotle speaks of ‘gain’, kerdos, as characteristic of greed, he needs to restrict it to gain at the
expense of another—the sort of gain that is also another's loss.
A similar distinction explains why Fred is merely ungenerous, even miserly, if he cares too much about his money,
whereas Bert displays special injustice, since he wants to enrich himself by taking advantage of other people. Again,
Fred is competitive against Curt to win something that both of them want; but Bert is pleonectic because he wants
to get the better of Curt by depriving Curt of something that Curt is justly entitled to.
Williams [1980] rejects Aristotle's efforts to connect injustice with pleonexia, or any one motive. But Williams's own
view, 198f, seems not to distinguish someone who is indifferent to, or insufﬁciently concerned with, justice from
the positively unjust person; this distinction is plausible enough to suggest that Aristotle might be right. On the
scope of general justice see Allan [1965a], 65–7.
The goods Aristotle has in mind include not only such occasional windfalls as the revenues from the Athenian
silver mines, but also the distribution of political power and ofﬁce, both an intrinsic and an instrumental good.
This is suggested by the reference to different political systems, 1131a25–9, and by the parallels in the Pol. Contrast
Hardie [1980], 191. Joachim [1951], 138f, remarks rightly that such distributive questions are a concern of wisdom,
and infers unjustiﬁably that they cannot be a concern of justice. The same distributive principles will presumably
also cover taxation (e.g. Athenian capital levies, eisphorai, and liturgies) and questions about the distribution of land
and the nature of laws about debt—two important issues for Greek radical democrats.
The passage is quoted and discussed further in § 233.
Perhaps, however, Aristotle means instead or as well that we should consider someone's political virtue, and hence
his likely contribution to the common welfare, before we appoint him to public ofﬁce. This would be a prospective
criterion; and we cannot guarantee that its results will coincide

NOTES

625

with the results of the retrospective criterion, looking at a person's past services. But Aristotle does not seem
concerned with the possible difference between these two criteria.
The possible difference emerges still more clearly in an analogy he uses to support virtue as the criterion. He
remarks that in distributing ﬂutes we would not give the best ﬂutes to the handsomest or tallest or richest people if
they were no good as ﬂautists; we give the best ﬂutes to the best ﬂautists, 1282b30–1283a3. Evidently the criterion
here is prospective. We look at people's likely performance and regard the item to be distributed as a resource or
instrument to be used for some purpose, and hence appropriately given to whoever will use it best for the intended
purpose. Aristotle sees no potential conﬂict between this way of looking at distributive justice and the retrospective
view of it that focuses on rewards for past services.
10. Aristotle's scheme looks unhelpfully naïve if it is taken to state a sufﬁcient condition for just punishment (see
Hardie [1980], 194). It is more reasonable if it states a necessary condition. In punishment we consider general
justice and the common interest, and these may lead us to impose a harsher penalty than corrective justice alone
would impose. Might it not also allow us to ignore a harm that corrective justice tells us to correct? We need some
account of the relation between the rather speciﬁc requirements of corrective justice and the requirements of the
rest of morality, above all of general justice.
11. Aristotle does not distinguish commercial justice from the ﬁrst two types, 1130b30–1131a4, and initially might
seem to be treating it as a type of corrective justice. This, however, is hard to believe. (See Hardie [1980], 194.) For
he remarks that retaliation ﬁts very poorly with corrective justice, and then concedes that it is quite a good account
of commercial justice, as long as the retaliation and reciprocity are proportional, not numerically equal, 1132b21–5.
Since corrective justice is concerned with numerical equality, it seems to contrast rather sharply with commercial
justice; and since Aristotle says a city holds together by proportional reciprocity, 1132b33–4, this form of justice
deserves some attention.
Commercial justice is the type that is most relevant to friendships for advantage that are an important part of a
political community. When Aristotle says that the political community seems to have come together at the start and
to remain in being for the sake of advantage, 1160a8–14, he does not contradict his claim that the city is not merely
an association for carrying on transactions for advantage, but for living well, Pol. 1278b20, 1328a35–b2. Though
these are not distinctive activities of the city, they may still be necessary for the city to exist and survive. If citizens
regularly cheated each other, and could not rely on satisfactory bargains, the distinctively political life of the city
would not survive either.
When is a transaction genuinely reciprocal, and hence just? Aristotle's initial claim is rather minimal and unhelpful.
There must be some way to measure and compare beds with corn, so that a carpenter and a farmer can exchange
their products. This sort of measure is provided by money, 1133a5–25, but need is the basic measure, 1133a25–7.
If ‘need’ is to be

626

NOTES

understood conatively, in relation to someone's desires, then if X is willing to pay the price Y asks, he has no
ground for complaint of unfairness or injustice. Such a view of need is assumed, e.g., by Hardie [1980], 198, who
moves from talk of needs to talk of the ‘ “demand” which springs from these needs’, without exploring the relation
between demand and need, and also takes Aristotle to assume that ‘the social value of a producer is measured by
the demand for his product’, 200.
On this view, even if X is mistaken about his good he has no ground for complaint. Aristotle, however, recognizes
some grounds for complaint in such bargains, when he discusses the casuistry of friendship for advantage.
Sometimes the beneﬁciary complains that the benefactor did something easy and wants too much in return, and
the benefactor tells the opposite story. Aristotle suggests that in these cases the beneﬁt to the beneﬁciary rather
than the effort of the benefactor should be decisive, 1164b16–20; at the same time he requires the beneﬁciary to
decide how much the service is worth to him before, not after, he obtains it, 1164b20–1. If these remarks can be
applied to commercial justice, the just price will apparently correspond to the beneﬁt of the buyer.
This seems to raise some further questions. If Croesus has been able to buy all the corn and will sell it to me only
at exorbitant rates that will reduce me nearly to destitution, I may be willing to pay a huge price for corn because I
correctly judge that I need it to stay alive; but does that make it a just transaction with Croesus? These problems
would be solved if Aristotle could show how degree of need can be determined without reference to the conditions
of supply and demand. On the difference between need and ‘demand’, as conceived in economic theory, see Finley
[1970], 146–50. Agreement with Finley on this point does not imply acceptance of his general claim that Aristotle's
account is ethical rather than part of an economic analysis (on this point Finley is criticized by Meikle [1979]).
12. We might think there are obvious counterexamples, in clearly just transactions that confer unequal beneﬁts. If
Croesus is far better off than I am, then apparently he needs nothing from me, and I cannot pay him enough for
what he sells me. But Aristotle is not worried by those cases when he discusses unequal friendships; there the
inferior party gives honour in return when he can give no other service, 1163b1–3. Nor will Aristotle shrink from
the implication that when Croesus becomes so rich that he needs no more money, he should retire and take up
transactions in honour instead—that is just what the magniﬁcent person will do. If, however, he needs the proﬁt of
his business for his magniﬁcent activities, that is a basis for commercial justice.
Hence Aristotle seems to accept the general principle that commercial justice ensures that someone who pays the
just price will not suffer a net loss of happiness by doing it, absolutely or in relation to the other party in the
transaction, and that he will not commit pleonexia on the other, enhancing his own prospects at the expense of the
other.
13. I might also properly be concerned about distribution between different

NOTES

627

stages of myself if they beneﬁt to different degrees from my action. see § 195 and 16n44 for analogies between the
intra-personal and inter-personal cases. The stability and concord of virtuous people within themselves and with
each other will be important for both cases.
14. Happiness requires the life of a virtuous active citizen adequately supplied with external goods. Hence the
constitution will prescribe a share in ruling for all the citizens. It will do this for three reasons: (1) This is part of
each citizen's happy life. (2) It is most likely to reach the correct answers about what promotes the common
interest. The collective intelligence of virtuous and intelligent people is more likely to reach the right answer than is
the unaided reﬂexion of one person. (3) It is most likely to produce the appropriate concord and satisfaction with
the constitution. A citizen will not feel himself slighted and dishonoured, as he would if he were allowed no role in
deliberation about the common interest; that would be the condition, Aristotle thinks, of a slave and an enemy,
1274a15–18.
Similarly, the requirements of happiness will guide the state in assuring an adequate level of external goods, offering
the citizen no opportunity for unlimited accumulation, and ensuring the private property needed for individual
initiatives in virtuous action.
15. 1288a32–b2 (cf. 1325b3–14) suggests that each correct constitution will be correct only in the conditions
appropriate for it, not in every condition. Monarchy is not correct when there is no one of preeminent virtue; and
restricted aristocracy, not including all the citizens, is not correct if all the citizens are of roughly equal virtue. Since
the best conditions are those in which all the citizens are virtuous, the best of the three correct constitutions in the
best conditions will be the one that gives all the citizens a share in ruling; but this will not be correct in less than
ideal conditions. And if the conditions deviate too far from the ideal, a correct constitution may be difﬁcult or
impossible (cf. 1286b20–2, 1293a1–9, 1297b22–8).
Only the correct systems rule with a view to the common interest, and the deviant ones rule with a view to the
interest of one group within the state, 1279a17–21. A true conception of general justice is the standard for
judgments about the correctness or deviance of a political system. Every political system, Aristotle assumes, will
claim to some degree that it is concerned with the common interest of its citizens; this is part of the status of a
citizen as opposed to a slave, 1279a30–2. However, not all systems are in fact designed to do what they say they are
doing. Aristotle's division is like a division between accurate and inaccurate thermometers. We may use inaccurate
ones with the intention of measuring the temperature accurately, and say that this is what we are doing, but we still
will not be able to do it. On the other hand, a correct constitution might fail to promote the common interest
because of unforeseeable circumstances; but it is still a correct constitution if the design of its institutions and laws
tends to promote the common interest, and avoids the bias that is characteristic of the deviant forms. A true
conception of general justice is needed for a correct system, and hence for a correct conception of special justice
and of equality.

628

NOTES

16. Assumptions, hupotheseis, are an important part of constitutions as Aristotle analyses them. He identiﬁes and
criticizes the assumption of the Spartan legislator, 1271a41–b3, and describes the democratic assumption and aim
as freedom, 1317a40–b2; cf. telos, Rhet. 1366a2–6. The best constitution rests on the best assumption, 1329a21–4;
cf. 1334b11; since it is the best, however, it can also be described as ‘best without qualiﬁcation’, not ‘best on an
assumption’, 1278a4, 1293b1–7, 1328b38, 1332a7–10. In some cases a false assumption is taken for granted
without argument, as it is in deviant constitutions.
Sometimes a regime may proceed on a false assumption that should be rejected even for the sake of that regime.
The tyrant proceeds on false assumptions about how to preserve his position, and these must be rejected,
1314a25–9; but still the politician's advice must proceed from the assumption that the tyranny is to be preserved,
1314a33–40. Again, Plato's assumption about the uniﬁcation of the ideal state is to be rejected as false, because it is
inconsistent with the nature of a state altogether, 1261a16–22. The tyrant's assumptions would presumably have
the same effect, of making the city into a collection of slaves and masters.
17. Aristotle thinks the crucial division in political systems is between democracy and oligarchy, between the rule of the
poor and the rule of the rich, 1290a13–b20. See 1280a7–11, 1296a22–3, 1301b39–1302a2, 1303b15–17,
1307a5–27, 1309b35–1310a2. Aristotle's description of the different systems raises some further questions about
their relation to the two basic principles.
‘Aristocracy’ is the name not only for the rule of genuinely virtuous people, in the ideal state, 1293b1–7, but also
for a restricted form of government that modiﬁes oligarchy by paying some attention to virtue as such,
1293b7–21. Such attention is reﬂected in concern for good birth and nobility, since good birth is simply longestablished wealth and virtue, 1294a20–2. Hence aristocracy appeals to the oligarchic conception of justice,
allowing for virtue as well as (or instead of) wealth. It rightly supposes that virtue is a relevant criterion, but
wrongly supposes that this requires a restricted political class. In the ideal state the citizen will be appropriately
virtuous, and in actual states there is enough virtue in the lower classes collectively to justify a share in ruling for
them.
It is harder to see why the non-ideal sort of aristocracy counts as a correct constitution. Aristotle recognizes that all
the constitutions fall short of the ideal state, 1293b24–6. But still he regards aristocracy as one of the three correct
forms, and oligarchy as a deviation from it, 1293b22–7. He assumes that the extent to which a constitution cares
about virtue in its rulers will advance its concern for the common interest. He realizes that not all regimes claiming
to be aristocracies cultivate anything like genuine virtue, 1293b42–1294a9; the ones that fall short of proper virtue
thereby fall short of being aristocracies. But even those that are non-ideal constitutions may be concerned for the
common interest in so far as they cultivate virtue.
Sidgwick [1892] and Newman [1892], [1887], iii.p. xxxvi, iv.p. ix, discuss the treatment of aristocracy in Pol. iii and
vii. I am sceptical of

NOTES

629

claims about inconsistency or development in Aristotle's view. In iii he relies, reasonably, on the endoxa about
aristocracy and (as Sidgwick emphasizes) ordinary putative examples of aristocracies; in vii he presents his own
example, based on a theory that only partly coincides with ordinary views.
A monarchy follows the same conception of justice as an aristocracy, claiming sufﬁcient superiority in virtue for a
single person. Hence it also reﬂects a variation in the oligarchic principle.
Tyranny is apparently another variation on the oligarchic principle, though its exact claim to justice is not clear,
since it is least like a genuine constitution, 1293b27–30; cf. 1289a38–b5, 1310b2–7. Does Aristotle think that a
tyrant makes a claim of justice that corresponds to the king's claim in the way an oligarchic claim corresponds to an
aristocratic? The oligarch claims that superiority gives him a just claim to rule; here he agrees with the aristocrat,
and is right; but he picks the wrong kind of superiority. Similarly, we might think, the tyrant might claim that his
supremacy gives him a just claim; here he agrees with the king, and is right; but he picks the wrong kind of
superiority, since he has supreme power but not supreme virtue.
However, Aristotle does not seem to examine the tyrant's claim to justice on these terms. He suggests instead a
second sort of claim, that the tyrant presents himself as an expedient for the protection of the masses against
injustice by the upper classes, 1310b12–14. In that case the tyrant's claim will be the democratic claim plus the
claim that he is needed to secure justice in these particular conditions.
This second claim to justice is considerably more plausible than the ﬁrst. The moderately plausible conception of a
state as a business partnership makes the oligarchic claim to superiority seem more plausible; but the tyrannical
claim about superiority rests on no equally plausible conception of the state. The claim about temporary
expediency is far more plausible. If Aristotle had concentrated more on this, he could have formed a much clearer
and more interesting conception of a tyranny, and could explain why it is not a constitution in the same way as the
others. Tyranny, he might say, does not have its own conception of justice. Rather, it presents itself as a defender of
one of the other conceptions of justice; though Aristotle mentions it only as a defender of the masses, it might
equally be a defender of the rich against the masses, as Gelon was in Syracuse.
This defence of tyranny shows why it is relevant to constitutions and cities; for in these cases the tyrant can appeal
to the common interest that is the characteristic aim of the city. If the tyrant could make no such appeal, his rule
would be the suppression of the constitution because it would be the suppression of the city of which the
constitution is the organization, 1274b38. As Aristotle often insists, a mere orderly and stable collection does not
constitute a city without the common aim at the common interest, 1280a31–3, 1283a17–20, 1291a8–10, 22–8,
1295b21–5, 1303a25–7, 1328b16–19. But since, as Aristotle recognizes, a tyrant often appeals to the common
interest, tyranny has a legitimate place in the discussion of constitutions.

630

NOTES

18. For partial grasp of some truth or principle cf. EE 1227a1–2, GC 324a14–15, Phys. 191b35–6.
19. Wood and Wood [1978], 239, suggest without warrant that Aristotle thinks the oligarchic conception of justice less
defective than the democratic; they do not consider the points of superiority in the democratic conception.
20. The connexion between democracy and a particular way of life is suggested in Thucydides ii 37.2–3, vii 69.2.
21. see § 23.
22. On preliminary questions see § 90.

Chapter 21
1. see § 199.
2. The character sketches may seem quite unlikely to support our general claims about the Ethics. (1) Aristotle seems
to be sketching some commonly recognized traits of character and the types of people who display them. The
canon seems to be taken from common beliefs, not justiﬁed from any less conventional basis. (Wood and Wood
[1978], 223–6 give a brief and ﬂagrantly one-sided account of the ‘aristocratic conservatism’ (223) of Aristotle's
discussion of the principal moral virtues.) (2) These seem to be described as distinct and separable traits; we ﬁnd
no systematic argument to show how each virtue promotes the common good. (3) The actions and attitudes
required by some of the virtues (e.g. magniﬁcence in iv 2, or wit in iv 8) seem to have very little to do with the
common good, or indeed with morality as it would normally be conceived. If the virtues ﬁt into our account of
Aristotle's ethics, these objections need to be removed.
3. Aristotle takes the ﬁne to be good in itself, 1104b31 (cf. Top. 118b27), 1155b18–21, 1169a6, but not identical to
what is good in itself; ‘best’, ‘ﬁnest’, and ‘pleasantest’ are three different features of the ﬁnal good, 1099a24, and
Aristotle will not agree that every pleasure that is good in itself is thereby ﬁne. His practice in the Ethics conforms
to his explicit account of the ﬁne as what is both good in itself and praiseworthy, EE 1248b18–25.
We have already seen that praise is awarded for actions that are in the agent's power, and that this is why legislators
are concerned with voluntary action, since they are concerned with praise and blame. (see § 81.) But we already
know that the sort of action that a legislator will correctly praise is the sort of action that promotes the common
good. Here, then, Aristotle marks the connexion he needs between the virtuous person's aims and motives and the
legislator's concern for general justice. For more details on the ﬁne see Engberg-Pederson [1983], ch. 3, Irwin
[1985a].
4. This passage connects three important concepts used in the account of the virtues; what is right and ought to be
done (dein), what is ﬁne, and what is beneﬁcial to others. Aristotle assumes, as 1120a11–13 shows, that by doing
what he ought to the virtuous person does ﬁne actions and actions that

NOTES

5.
6.

7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

631

beneﬁt others. Other comments connect what we ought to do with what is correct and what is ﬁne, 1119a11–20,
1120a23–9, 1121a1, b4–5, 1179a3–13, 29. These comments are important because Aristotle refers to what ought
to be done in his speciﬁcation of the doctrine of the mean; we hit the mean when we are angry, e.g., as, when, and
towards whom we ought to be. When the action we ought to do is identiﬁed with ﬁne action and this in turn is
expected to beneﬁt others, the doctrine of the mean acquires more deﬁnite content.
It would be quite a usual use of ‘brave’ to say that someone who commits a crime without fear of danger or
punishment is brave (cf. Plato, Rep. 561a1), but Aristotle refuses to say so, 1115a23–4.
Intemperate people are ungenerous to others, so that they can devote their resources to their own pleasures,
1121b7–10. They form the wrong sorts of attachments, because they must always be looking for an adequate
return of pleasure or advantage, and so will always be suspicious and ready to quarrel, 1159b7–10, 1166b13–17,
1167b9–16, 1172a8–10. While genuine friendship will be hard for them, they will be easily attracted to ﬂatterers
who offer them pleasures, 1121b3–7.
see § 205.
The magniﬁcent person will want to build himself a grand house, and he will want to ﬁt out his warships and his
choruses in a way that does him honour. But he will not seek pointless display that merely advertises his own
wealth in a way that beneﬁts no one else; he will not equip his chorus with purple robes simply to show he can
afford them, 1123a20–7. Someone whose expenditure is regulated by concern for the common good can beneﬁt
both himself and the community; but someone with no concern for the community will be lavish only when it
advertises his wealth, not when the community needs some large expenditure, 1123a24–7.
On slavishness see § 220.
I assume that Aristotle takes some external goods to be intrinsic goods for a good person, not just instrumental to
virtuous activities. See Irwin [1985], 93–7, against Cooper [1985a], 187–90, and Nussbaum [1986], 327–36.
see § 202.
It would be a mistake to suppose that the virtuous person's inﬂexibility about virtue will simply make him less
concerned than other people are about external goods. For he may actually be readier than some people to pursue
them. If we think that wealth is, or is a necessary means to, a dominant component of happiness, we may be
conservative in taking risks, fearful of poverty, and so inclined to be miserly (cf. 1121b21–31). The virtuous person
may actually be a keener investor in worthwhile ventures that are less than absolutely safe. Similarly, the lover of
honour will play safe and avoid some competitions, for fear of failure and dishonour. The virtuous person does
not mind dishonour so much that he will avoid any risk of it. The person who is afraid of a rebuff in his demands
for honour is pusillanimous; the magnanimous person will readily compete for honour, and demand honour even
if he is rebuffed. Since honour is not the dominant component of happiness, a virtuous person will not think

632

NOTES

dishonour necessarily leaves him with no life worth living; and for this very reason he will not try to cultivate
indifference to honour and dishonour. To the extent that the common good and the agent's own good require
risky ventures, we have reason to encourage the relative insouciance of the virtuous person over the miserly
calculating of the person who overvalues external goods.
13. See §§ 233–4.
14. To explain why there are different types of political systems Aristotle appears to offer different answers: (1) They
reﬂect different views about happiness, and hence about who is capable of it, 1328a37–b2; see § 218. (2) They
reﬂect different conceptions of justice, 1280a7–25, 1301a25–39; cf. 1317b8–9, 1318a11–26, 1337b2–3. (3) They
reﬂect the different kinds of people and their relative numbers and strength in a particular city, 1286b20–2,
1289b27–1290a13, vi 4, 1296b24–34, 1297b16–28, 1317a22–9. See Newman, i. 219–23.
Aristotle does not say which of these explanations is basic; each state of affairs is taken to be the, or a, cause, aition,
1289b27, 1328a40; archê, 1301a26; ek, 1301a29.
15. see § 235.
16. Another traditional principle distinguishes states in which the laws are supreme from those in which they are not.
Aristotle thinks this is also a signiﬁcant principle of division, since he thinks the supremacy of the laws is in the
common interest, 1282b1–13. But he thinks this only with an important restriction. The supremacy of the laws is
not sufﬁcient for a correct and just constitution, since the character of the laws depends on the character of the
constitution, and bad constitutions will have bad laws, 1274b15–18, 1286a3, 1287a3–6, 1289a11–25. Hence it will
be good only ceteris paribus if the law is supreme. If the laws are bad and the violation of them will promote the
common interest, then apparently it would be better to violate them, e.g. in tyrannies that arise in reaction to legally
sanctioned oppression of the many by the few. Aristotle does not discuss precisely this case. (Such temporary
absolute rulers as Pittacus did not violate the laws, 1285a29–b3, and were not genuine tyrants.) But he seems to be
committed to allowing it as a practical possibility; hence he cannot say it is always better to observe the laws than to
violate them.
If, however, a tyrant violates oppressive laws, he should (Aristotle believes) replace them with more just laws; if the
conditions require it, these laws might include a legally recognized position for himself, such as Pittacus had,
1285a37–b1, so that he would cease to be a tyrant, 1295a7–24. Aristotle sees no excuse for the continuation of a
lawless condition or a condition in which the law is not supreme. A law has to guide and to justify actions for a
reasonable length of time, and to provide some publicly known and accepted basis for the action. These features of
law will encourage a deviant regime to moderate its claims, and to mitigate the consequences of its false conception
of justice. Freedom from legal restraint will remove these mitigating tendencies and display more fully the faults in
the regime's conception of justice. Hence Aristotle distinguishes types of

NOTES

17.
18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

633

oligarchy and democracy by the role they allow to law, and regards the supremacy of law as a count in favour of a
regime, 1291b30–4, 1292a1–38, b5–10, 27, 37, 41, 1293a9–10, 12–34.
Rawls [1971], 145, 176–8, argues against conceptions of justice that demand a degree of self-sacriﬁce imposing
severe strains of commitment.
On Thrasymachus see § 213.
Oligarchies allow public ofﬁces to be sources of proﬁt, and apply inadequate checks and oversight to public
ofﬁcials, 1308b31–4. Democracies allow popular assemblies and courts to do as they please unrestrained by law,
and under the inﬂuence of demagogues. Here the conﬂict is not simply the result of private injustice and greed; it is
also the result of the structure of the constitution, which tends to undermine its own conception of justice.
The few commit injustice against the many both in oligarchies and in polities; and by doing this they threaten the
stability of each constitution, even in some cases encouraging the growth of tyranny, 1307a7, 24, 1308a9, 1310b13,
1311a25, 1318b37. The proper motive of special injustice, pleonexia (see §229), is especially characteristic of the few,
1301a35, 1307a31, 35; cf. 1311a5, 1333b10. Certainly Aristotle often says or implies that the many commit
injustice against the few, 1266b40, 1267a41, 1281a14, 1304b32, 1305a4, 1307a31, 35, 1308a9, 1311a1, 1318a25.
He implies that they are also capable of pleonexia, 1267b7–8, 1297a11–13. But he does not attribute it to them as a
motive for injustice; and he remarks that the greed of the rich is more dangerous than the greed of the many to the
stability of the polity, 1297a11–13.
Aristotle remarks that if oligarchs had enough virtue to achieve concord among themselves the oligarchy would be
hard to destroy from within, 1306a9–12. But often they prefer to commit injustice on each other and destroy
concord among themselves; they distrust each other too much to conduct business well, 1306a19–31. Similarly,
their injustice to the demos makes the demos ready to listen to aspiring tyrants leading them against the oligarchy,
1305a21–3, 1310b14–16. On injustice and instability see Mulgan [1977], 120, who overemphasizes the importance
for Aristotle of the sense of injustice, and underemphasizes the role of the actual injustice of a state. In attending to
the role of injustice, Aristotle is not concerned solely with citizens' beliefs that they are being treated unjustly.
Aristotle cites the oligarchic oath enjoining malevolence towards the demos, 1310a7–12. He cites no similar
example of open anti-oligarchic expression of sentiment in democracies; he simply alleges that the demagogues
divide the city into two by ﬁghting the rich, 1310a2–6. Tyranny takes this attitude still further, since the tyrant tries
to encourage distrust among all the citizens, so that they will be unwilling to take the risk of combining against him,
1314a15–23.
A government has to be especially careful not to insult and provoke lovers of honour, 1302b10–14, 1315a17–24,
since, together with love of gain, it is the most prevalent source of injustice, 1271a13–18. But the systems in which
honour-loving people grow up are also the most likely to provoke

634

NOTES

this. The restricted citizenship in Sparta was partly the result of the Spartiates' competitive conception of honour;
but it excluded and humiliated other honour-loving people who were ready to rebel, 1306b22–6. Someone with the
appropriate ‘manly’ character (andrôdês, 1306b34, Rhet. 1391a22, EN 1125b12) is encouraged in an honour-loving
system, and easily ﬁnds something to provoke him. In a tyranny honour-lovers are a special threat, since the regime
requires the humiliation of any citizens who might challenge the tyrant; the tyrant's measures to secure his position
may provoke the very reaction he fears, 1315a16–24. These are the people who are liable to attack the tyrant,
1312a21–30 (different motives); cf. 1311a18–20. The honour-lover is easily provoked to anger, associated with
love of honour in Aristotle as in Plato; and an angry person is less likely to restrict himself to safe methods,
1315a27–31, 1312b25–34. He has the necessary boldness, thrasos, 1312a17–19, 1315a8–14, to do what his honour
seems to require.
A competitive attitude to honour characteristically reﬂects the view that honourable qualities demand
competition—success in war, business, politics. And we think of these as honourable qualities because they
assure for us the external and contested goods that we need for gratiﬁcation. Hence a competitive attitude to
honour is characteristically associated with some attachment to the life of gratiﬁcation. The Spartans are
professional honour-lovers, but their conception of honour is itself highly competitive; that is why they are so keen
to dominate their neighbours. They think they cannot be properly honoured without domination, because they
value the contested goods that are needed for a life of gratiﬁcation (cf. 1271a41–b10, 1324b1–12, 1334a36–b4).
Love of honour is especially dangerous to regimes of the few, in which the rulers tend to struggle against each
other, 1308a31–2. Sometimes these struggles cause one group of rulers to inﬂict humiliating punishments on their
opponents, 1306a36–b2. Sometimes they encourage oligarchs to compete against each other for the favour of the
many, 1305b22–3; they disturb the constitution in either a democratic or a tyrannical direction.
The many do not completely lack love of honour, and Aristotle thinks it is fairly easily satisﬁed if they are allowed
to elect and to supervise ofﬁce-holders, 1297b6–8, 1318b21–7. He sees that it is important not to abase and
humiliate the masses, 1274a15–17, 1281b28–30. But since they are not concerned so strongly with the competitive
aspects of honour, they are not so likely to cause the sort of trouble caused by oligarchs. Oligarchy appeals to
competitive motives; but these motives themselves threaten the stability of oligarchy.
23. Hence Aristotle associates aggressiveness especially with wealth, Rhet. 1390b32–1391a5; cf. 1385b19–21,
1391a33–b3. The Pol. identiﬁes a similar vice characteristic of those who cannot use their leisure and good fortune
correctly, 1308b10–16, 1334a25–34. These people turn to luxury, truphê, 1291a4, 1295b13–18, 1310a22–3,
1311a11, 1314b28–32, 1326b38–9, Rhet. 1391a3, since it is a sign of good fortune, allowing someone to live
lavishly

NOTES

635

above the margin of necessity. For the same reason such people like to display their position by aggression against
others.
24. Aristotle distinguishes greed as a motive for special injustice from the other vices as motives for general injustice.
Greed essentially requires the desire to have more, to proﬁt by taking what is justly due to my neighbour. Aristotle
admits that the many may have ever-increasing desires for more and more, 1267a39–b9; but this need not be a
pleonectic desire, since it need not include the desire to get more than someone else has. The poor may well form
pleonectic desires, but they are less characteristically moved by them than the rich are. For the rich tend to seek
honour from wealth, since they have more than they need to gratify their appetites; the desire for honour easily
makes them competitive; and then greed to have more than someone else at the other's expense becomes
intelligible.
Oligarchs are therefore more likely than democrats to quarrel among themselves, since their competitive desires
aim at each other even more than at the many. Democracies try to raise the level of the poor to gratify the desires
of the poor, but not primarily to impoverish or humiliate the rich. Plato's Callicles sees in democracy the results of
jealousy and envy, resulting in a desire to humiliate the better people, Gorg. 483b4–484a2; but this is not Aristotle's
explanation.
For similar reasons Aristotle sees the injustice of the few expressed in private lawless actions, either violating the
law or wrongly permitted by the law. This was the sort of injustice that Solon and Peisistratus tried to curb; it still
tends to force oligarchies towards tyrannies, though, ironically, tyrannies allow the most licence for such
lawlessness by the tyrant himself. In democracies injustice against the few is normally collective, using the
constitutional provisions applying to assembly or courts, directed against the rich as a class, and only secondarily
against individual rich people. The reason for the difference is related to the different roles of pleonexia. Democrats
are not out to display individual superiority over individual oligarchs, but to gratify their appetites; superiority over
individual oligarchs is a side-effect, sometimes but not always independently desired.
25. Aggression is a vice of the upper classes. Aristotle never suggests that the many inﬂict it on the few, though they
certainly inﬂict other sorts of injustice on them. Aggression is characteristic of tyrants, 1311a25–8, 32–6, b18–20,
1314b23–7 and of oligarchs, 1295b9–11, 1297b6–8, 1307a15–20, 1310b40–1311a2. It is such a serious threat to
oligarchies that they will be wise to punish aggression by a rich on a poor person more harshly than they punish
aggression by one rich person on another, 1309a22–3.
26. Though the honour-loving outlook reﬂects a basically false conception of happiness, it may encourage people in
right actions and restrain them from wrong actions. Some sense of honour encourages particularly energetic people
to rebel against tyrants. Still more important, it encourages collective resistance to injustice; it is part of the motive
for the poor not to accept unpunished aggression by the rich. For this reason the ideal state will

636

27.

28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

34.

35.
36.

NOTES

cultivate some love of honour, 1328a6–16, and tyrants try to suppress it because they see it is dangerous to
themselves, 1314a15–25. Since it is a protection against pusillanimity, 1314a15–17, love of honour must not be
rejected altogether; someone who has it takes a ‘digniﬁed’, semnon, attitude, 1314a5–10, b18–20, Rhet. 1391a20–9,
and will not allow himself to do just anything for gain or allow anyone else to abuse or insult him.
The upper classes evidently seek gratiﬁcation, since oligarchs aim at wealth, and tyrants are the most conspicuous
advocates of gratiﬁcation, 1312b23–5, 1314b28–32. However, these people pursue gratiﬁcation in competition
with others, to display their own superiority; hence their pursuit of gratiﬁcation also aims at honour. The lower
classes display the non-competitive pursuit of gratiﬁcation.
Aristotle relies on the old picture of the demos as tyrant and the demagogues as ﬂatterers to suggest the sources of
injustice in an extreme democracy. See Plato, Rep. 493a–d, and Aristophanes' Knights.
On living as one pleases see §223.
See 19n23 on military service.
See §225.
They may be caused by wars, by foreign inﬂuence, 1296a32–8, or by changes in the social and economic conditions
or composition of the state, e.g. 1286b20–2, 1302b33–1303a2, 1310b17–18, 1320b17–32, or in the relative status
of some part of it, 1297b12–26, 33, 1304a17–33.
See 1274a11–15 (excusing Solon), 1293a1–6, 1303a3–10, a25–b3, b7–14 (location of the city), 1306b6–16 (peace
increases the number of wealthy people), 1321a5–14. The political scientist needs the appropriate resources, the
external goods that partly depend on chance, 1289a32, 1295a28, 1325b40, 1326a5, 1332a1, 1333b17, though
success with them requires not only chance but the wise person's correct use of them, 1323b26–31,
1323b40–1324a2, 1332a29–32.
Aristotle develops Plato's account of constitutional change in Republic viii–ix, and, as usual, criticizes Plato's
account for being over-simpliﬁed. Plato fails even to consider many changes, and offers too few possible
explanations of the changes that are considered, 1316a1–b27; concentrates too heavily on conﬂict within the ruling
class as a cause of change, e.g. 1316a39–b3; and considers only one direction of change, 1316a23–4. The
characteristic difference between the Pol. and the Rep. is displayed in Aristotle's enthusiastic presentation of
historical examples that do not ﬁt Plato's account. Still, he follows Plato in one important feature of his
explanations; Plato draws attention to the effects of character on constitutional change, and Aristotle develops
Plato's general claim into a more precise and complex pattern of explanation.
See §240.
Bradley [1927], 196. Here Bradley actually appeals to what he takes to be Aristotle's moral epistemology, to
support uncritical acceptance of the moral principles of one's own society. He reaches his conclusion from
Aristotle, by ignoring Aristotle's conception of the ideal state, his criticism of deviant states, and his division
between the virtue of a man and the virtue

NOTES

637

of the citizen. (‘My station and its duties’, however, is not Bradley's last word on morality either.)
37. Aristotle has no revolutionary strategy or tactics to suggest either, for these reasons: (1) He has no account of how
to create the conditions for the ideal state, and hence no advice for those who want to transform actual states in
the ideal direction. (2) He does not agree with the competing parties in actual states that their interests necessarily
conﬂict in present conditions. Hence he does not believe that violent action against one class or another is
necessary for producing an improvement. (3) He does not think moral principles, especially principles of justice,
are relative to a particular political or economic order, or that the true principles can be practised only in the ideal
state.
On all these points Aristotle presents a sharp contrast with Marx; it is all the sharper when their views are so close
on many other points. Some points of comparison are usefully marked by Wood [1981], 22–4, 126f. They are
explored in a helpfully thought-provoking polemical discussion by Meikle [1985], 18–25. An explanation of the
contrast is offered by De Ste Croix [1981], who, during a sympathetic comparison of Aristotle's political sociology
with Marx, 69–80, comments appropriately: ‘ . . . in the class society for which Aristotle was prescribing the
conﬂicts were indeed inescapable, and no radical transformation of society for the better was then conceivable. In
the later Middle Ages the ending of feudal restrictions and the full transition to capitalism offered real hope of
betterment to all but a few; and in our own time the prolonged death-throes of capitalism encourage us to look
forward to a full socialist society. For Aristotle and his contemporaries there were no prospects of fundamental
change that could offer any expectation of a better life for even a citizen of a polis, except at the expense of others’,
76.
38. Aristotle says it is the task of each craft to ﬁnd what is best altogether, given the right initial conditions, and what is
‘ﬁtting’ or ‘expedient’ in particular conditions, given the external circumstances and the customer's desires,
1288b10–21. It is the doctor's task to advise someone who refuses to give up mountaineering even though it is bad
for his health, or someone who refuses to migrate to Arizona to relieve his asthma. The politician is supposed to
consider not only (i) the best system in the right external conditions; (ii) the system that best suits these people in
these external conditions; (iii) the system that best suits all cities; but also (iv) the system that is best ‘on an
assumption’, 1288b21–38.
Aristotle does not suggest, though, that a craft should allow itself to be misused; he considers only the use of the
craft for its proper end. The doctor should advise the patient about how to stay healthy within these restrictions,
not about how to ruin his health, even though the doctor might be the best qualiﬁed adviser about that also. The
sort of advice a political scientist should give depends on the proper end of political science, which is the good of
the community. Hence he should give advice about stability only in so far as it fulﬁls this prior aim. If this is
Aristotle's view, then the right technical advice must rest on a true conception of the end.

638

39.

40.
41.
42.

43.

44.

NOTES

His aims in reforming constitutions are discussed by Rowe [1977] (who sees more disunity in Aristotle's views than
I am inclined to see), and by Mulgan [1977], 130–6.
On assumptions see 20n16. Some assumptions underlying deviant systems are neither true nor disastrously false.
In these cases we must distinguish what is best without qualiﬁcation from what is best in relation to a speciﬁc
assumption, and some of our criticisms and advice must be restricted by the assumption (cf. 1269a39, 1279a36,
1294a7, 1296b9, 1314a38).
A tyranny, e.g., that has proceeded on a false assumption may have done so much harm that it cannot improve
itself. Nor does Aristotle say it is always better for a politician to offer preservative advice.
His advice might actually encourage the right kind of constitutional change, even if it retards the pace of it. If an
oligarchy improves itself enough to change into a responsible democracy rather than a tyranny, Aristotle might
point to this direction of change as a beneﬁt of political advice.
He disdains constitutional ‘tricks’ (sophismata, 1307b39–1308a3), devices intended to conceal the real bias of the
constitution, and to give the weaker group the appearance of some power without the reality, 1297a14–38.
Aristotle suggests that these will be ‘found out’, 1308a1, because they will not deceive their intended victims. But
some of the harsher measures of tyranny and democracy are more than tricks; though Aristotle rejects them also,
he does not say they are ineffective, 1313b32–1314a14, 1319b19–32. See further Mulgan [1977], 132.
If the assembly is controlled by the many and the courts by the few, the few will suffer injustice in the assembly and
repay it in the courts, and the state will be more unstable. Aristotle criticizes these divided loyalties in a state whose
education does not agree with the laws, 1293b11–21, 1310a12–28. Divided loyalties result from the unskilful
mixing that Aristotle criticizes in the existing mixed constitutions of Crete, Sparta, and Carthage, e.g. 1270b6–35.
Clearly it is not the result he intends when he advocates mixing, e.g. 1307b26–39.
Aristotle's main advice concerns the treatment of the losers in the oligarchic or democratic state. The winners
should pay special attention to the welfare of the losers, and avoid the sort of injustice against them that is the work
of oligarchs unchecked by law or of demagogues who use the forms of legality for unjust exaction, 1298b13,
1303a10, 1309a14, 20, 1310a3, 1311a15, 1316a13, 1320a4, 26. Democracy is on the whole more stable than
oligarchy, and the polity is more stable if it tends to democracy, 1296a13, 1307a16, 1308b30, 1309b18. Aristotle
allows that the inherent tendency of oligarchy to oppress the poor is stronger and less easily controlled than the
inherent tendency of democracy to oppress the rich. For the many are stronger and more content with equal
shares, 1307a17–20, while the few are always eager to compete against each other. Hence he recognizes a tendency
to greater democracy, and argues that it need not be as seriously unjust as some of its critics suggest, if it takes
proper account of the interests of the political losers.

NOTES

639

45. Aristotle is especially concerned to avoid extremes of wealth and poverty, since these lead citizens both to have and
to notice conﬂicting aims and interests, 1306b36, 1320a17–b4. This advice is intended to avoid the tendency of a
poor demos to demand support from public funds, and so to be eager to commit injustice on the rich. But the
same advice seems to commit Aristotle in many conditions to the advocacy and approval of considerable
redistribution. Here again he seems to provide for arrangements that in many actual conditions will require more
democracy than he actually mentions; for it would surely be hard to carry out the necessary redistribution without
democracy or some strong tendencies to it. The constitution that best suits most conditions and cities is polity; and
democracy deviates less from this, its corresponding correct constitution, than other deviant constitutions deviate
from their correct forms. It is reasonable to expect, then, that in many conditions democracy will be the best
deviant system, and in the subset of these cases where a polity is impossible, democracy will be the best available
system altogether.
46. See 1266b34–8, 1269a20–4, 1310a12–22, 1319b1–6, 1337a11–18, and 19n32.
47. In non-ideal states the citizens are incapable of a virtuous and happy life. If the ideal state provides a reasonable
standard for justice and the common interest, 1296b2–12, a constitution aiming at the degree of happiness
possible for the citizens must be the best one, and a virtuous life with an adequate supply of external goods must
be preferable to the lives that aim at honour or gratiﬁcation of appetite, even for people whose nature, training, and
environment make them incapable of complete virtue.
48. On Aristotle's misuse of the doctrine of the mean see Robinson [1962], 103 (who endorses a different unwarranted
inference from the doctrine), Mulgan [1977], 107–10.
49. This is true provided that there should be private property in the state at all; see § 251.
50. see § 220.
51. Private property is meant for a state in which all the citizens are in a position to live a life of leisure and virtue, so
that each has a sufﬁcient supply of externals to free him from concern with them. Aristotle is not thinking of a way
to supply the needs of the desperately poor by making them dependent on the charity of the rich; indeed he argues
against this, in so far as he stresses the evil of letting the lower classes be impoverished and dependent, e.g.
1309a20–6; and cf. 1329b41–1330a18. The sort of generosity he wants to protect assumes that citizens are in
roughly equal conditions and that none is totally dependent on the generosity of others. Since these are Aristotle's
assumed background conditions for private property, his view raises the possibility that in conditions where private
property encourages the sorts of evils that he wants to avoid, its advantages may be overridden by the greater
importance of avoiding these other evils.
52. Aristotle uses these points about self-sacriﬁce to criticize Plato for going to self-defeating extremes in his efforts to
make the whole city promote its common interest. Aristotle supposes (most dubiously) that Plato has deprived the
guardians of happiness to secure the happiness of the whole

640

NOTES

city, and argues against Plato that the happiness of the whole cannot be secured by forcing one large part to
renounce its own self-conﬁned interest for the sake of the other parts, 1264b15–25. On Aristotle's own use of the
organic analogy see § 217.
53. On menial workers see 19n19.
54. In an ideal state why should a citizen not exercise generosity without exclusive ownership, through his role in
collective actions? Even apart from collective action, the state might loan him some resources to use as he sees ﬁt;
and in disposing of these, he apparently exercises generosity without ownership.
55. Similarly, we need not accept without question his rejection of artifacts as substances, and we need not make this a
count against his general view of substance, if we see that the general view does not support the speciﬁc conclusion
about artifacts. See 12n8.

Chapter 22
1. See Phys. 185a12–20, 192a34–b1, EN 1097b30–1, 1102a18–23, EE 1216b40–1217a10. See § §11, 77.
2. See e.g. EN 1094b19–1095a2; cf. 16n3.
3. Aristotle is fond of saying that he has discussed something only ‘in outline’, tupô(i). See IA 779a24–48, Régis
[1935], 155f.
4. See the just comments of Bonitz [1848], ii.29: ‘Is enim ut est diligentissimus in cognoscendis rebus singularibus,
quorum ingentem prorsus et prope incredibilem animo complexus est scientiam, ut est acutus et ingeniosus in
redigendis his singulis rebus ad summas, quas distinxit, omnium entium categorias; ita quum de iaciendis altissimis
doctrinae fundamentis et de conﬁrmandis interque se conciliandis principiis agitur, plurimum relinquit
dubitationis.’ Both Eucken [1872], 33, and Le Blond [1939], 122n, have thought Bonitz's remark striking enough
to deserve quotation in a book on Aristotle's methods.
5. On Phys. 192a34–b2, 194b14–15, DA 403b15–16, see 3n52, 8n2.
6. On the lateness of the DA see 13n33. On the DA and the ethical works see 15n2. On the EN see 16n5.
7. Contrast, e.g., DA 412a3–13 with Phys. 192b33–4, where the claim about substance is both less precise and less
similar to the Met.
8. see § 95.
9. see § 194.
10. see § 78.
11. Cf. § 6.
12. see § 154.
13. Ross [1923], preface.
14. see § 84. In referring to Aristotle's aims in studying past philosophers, I am not assuming that he succeeds in his
aims. The fairest general assessment of his views on the Presocratics is Guthrie [1957], reacting to the unfair,

NOTES

641

sometimes uncomprehending, attacks by Cherniss [1935]. Cherniss [1944] attacks Aristotle's criticism of Plato
from the same point of view as in his previous book. Fine [1983], [1984], [1987], examines Aristotle's criticism of
Plato from a point of view far more sympathetic than Cherniss's, but without simply endorsing Aristotle's
criticisms.
15. Green [1890], i.4f.
16. The passage is quoted in § 84.

Bibliography
Ackrill, J. L., [1963] (tr. and ed.), Categories and De Interpretatione, Oxford, 1963.
—— [1965] ‘Aristotle's distinction between energeia and kinesis’, in Bambrough [1965], 121–41.
—— [1972] ‘Aristotle on “good” and the categories’, in AA ii, 17–24. From Islamic Philosophy and the Classical Tradition,
ed. S. M. Stern, V. Brown, and A. Hourani (Oxford, 1972), 17–25.
—— [1972a] ‘Aristotle's deﬁnitions of psuche’, in AA iv, 65–75. From PAS 73 (1972–3), 119–33.
—— [1974] ‘Aristotle on eudaimonia’, in EAE, 15–34. From PBA 60 (1974), 339–59.
—— [1981] ‘Aristotle's theory of deﬁnition’, in Berti [1981], 359–84.
Albritton, R. G., [1957] ‘Forms of particular substances in Aristotle's Metaphysics’, JP 54 (1957), 699–708.
Allan, D. J., [1961] ‘Quasi-mathematical method in the Eudemian Ethics’, in Mansion [1961], 303–18.
—— [1964] ‘On Aristotle's metaphysics’, Dialogue 2 (1964), 454–9.
—— [1965] ‘Causality, ancient and modern’, SPAS 39 (1965), 1–18.
—— [1965a] ‘Individual and state in Aristotle's Ethics and Politics’, in Entretiens sur l'Antiquité Classique 11 (Geneva,
1965), 53–85.
Allen, R. E., [1969] ‘Individual properties in Aristotle's Categories’, Phr. 14 (1969), 31–9.
—— [1973] ‘Substance and predication in Aristotle’, in Lee [1973], 362–73.
Alpern, K. D., [1983] ‘Aristotle on the friendships of utility and pleasure’, JHP 21 (1983), 305–15.
Ando, T., [1958] Aristotle's Theory of Practical Cognition, 3rd edn., The Hague, 1958.
Annas, J., [1974] ‘Individuals in Aristotle's Categories: two queries’, Phr. 19 (1974), 146–52.
—— [1977] ‘Plato and Aristotle on friendship and altruism’, Mind 86 (1977), 532–54.
—— [1982], ‘Aristotle on inefﬁcient causes’, PQ 32 (1982), 311–26.
—— [1986a], ‘Doing without objective values’, in The Norms of Nature, ed. M. Schoﬁeld and G. Striker (Cambridge,
1986), 3–29.
—— and Barnes, J., [1986] The Modes of Scepticism, Cambridge, 1986.
Anscombe, G. E. M., [1953] ‘The principle of individuation’, in Anscombe [1981], 57–65, and AA iii, 88–95. From
SPAS 27 (1953), 83–96.
—— and Geach, P. T., [1961] Three Philosophers, Oxford, 1961.
—— [1965] ‘Thought and action in Aristotle’, in Anscombe [1981], 66–77, and AA, ii 61–71. From Bambrough
[1965], 143–58.
—— [1981] Collected Papers i, Oxford, 1981.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

643

Anton, J. P., and Kustas, G. L., eds., [1971] Essays in Ancient Greek Philosophy i, Albany, 1971.
—— and Preus, A., eds., [1983] Essays in Ancient Greek Philosophy ii, Albany, 1983.
Apelt, O., [1891] Beiträge zur Geschichte der griechischen Philosophie, Leipzig, 1891.
Aquinas, Thomas, In Aristotelis Metaphysica, ed. M. R. Cathala and R. M. Spiazzi, Turin, 1950.
—— In De Anima, ed. A. M. Pirotta, Turin, 1959.
—— Summa contra Gentiles, ed. C. Pera et al., Turin, 1961.
—— Summa Theologiae, ed. R. Caramello, Turin, 1952.
Armstrong, D. M., [1968] A Materialist Theory of the Mind, London, 1968.
—— [1973] Belief, Truth, and Knowledge, Cambridge, 1973.
—— [1978] Universals and Scientiﬁc Realism, 2 vols., Cambridge, 1978.
—— [1983] What is a Law of Nature?, Cambridge, 1983.
Arpe, C., [1938] Das ti ên einai bei Aristoteles, Hamburg, 1938.
Aubenque, P., [1961] ‘Sur la notion aristotélicienne de l'aporie’, in Mansion [1961], 3–19.
—— [1966] Le problème de l'être chez Aristote, 2nd edn., Paris, 1966.
Ayers, M. R., [1974] ‘Individuals without sortals’, CJP 4 (1974), 113–48.
Balme, D. M., [1972] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: De Partibus Animalium i, Oxford, 1972.
Bambrough, R., ed., [1965] New Essays on Plato and Aristotle, London, 1965.
Barker, E., [1906] The Political Thought of Plato and Aristotle, London, 1906.
Barnes, J., [1969] ‘Aristotle's theory of demonstration’, in AA i, 65–87. From Phr. 14 (1969), 123–52.
—— [1969a] ‘The Law of Contradiction’, PQ 19 (1969), 302–9.
—— [1970] ‘Property in Aristotle's Topics’, AGP 52 (1970), 136–55.
—— [1971] ‘Aristotle's concept of mind’, in AA iv, 32–41. From PAS 72 (1971–2), 101–14.
—— [1975] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, Oxford, 1975.
—— [1977] Review of Hintikka [1973], JHS 97 (1977), 183–6.
—— [1981] ‘Proof and the syllogism’, in Berti [1981], 17–59.
—— [1981a] ‘Aristotle and the methods of ethics’, Revue Internationale de la Philosophie 34 (1981), 490–511.
—— ed., [1984] Complete Works of Aristotle: the Revised Oxford Translation, 2 vols., Princeton, 1984.
—— Schoﬁeld, M., and Sorabji, R., eds., [1975a] Articles on Aristotle, 4 vols., London, 1975–9 (cited as ‘AA’).
—— Burnyeat, M. F., and Schoﬁeld, M., eds., [1980] Doubt and Dogmatism, Oxford, 1980.
Beck, L. W., [1960] A Commentary on Kant's Critique of Practical Reason, Chicago, 1960.
Bekker, I., [1831] (ed.) Aristotelis Opera, 5 vols., Berlin 1831–70.
Bennett, J., [1964] Rationality, London, 1964.
—— [1976] Linguistic Behaviour, Cambridge, 1976.
Berlin, I., [1973] ‘Austin and the early beginnings of Oxford philosophy’, in Essays on J. L. Austin (Oxford, 1973).

644

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Berti, E., [1965] L'unità del sapere in Aristotele, Padua, 1965.
—— ed., [1981] Aristotle on Science, Padua, 1981.
Block, I., [1961] ‘The order of Aristotle's psychological writings’, American Journal of Philology 82 (1961), 50–77.
—— [1961a] ‘Truth and error in Aristotle's theory of sense perception’, PQ 11 (1961), 1–9.
—— [1964] ‘Three German commentators on the individual senses and the common sense in Aristotle’, Phr. 9 (1964),
58–63.
—— [1965] ‘On the commonness of the common sensibles’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy 43 (1965), 189–95.
—— [1969] ‘Aristotle and the physical object’, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 21 (1969), 93–101.
Block, N. J., [1971] ‘Are mechanical and teleological explanations of behaviour incompatible?’, PQ 21 (1971), 109–17.
—— ed., [1980] Readings in Philosophical Psychology, vol. 1, Cambridge, Mass., 1980.
Blumenthal, H. J., [1976] ‘Neoplatonic elements in the De Anima commentaries’, Phr. 21 (1976), 64–87.
Bolton, R., [1976] ‘Essentialism and semantic theory in Aristotle’, PR 85 (1976), 514–44.
Bonitz, H., [1848] (ed.) Aristotelis Metaphysica, 2 vols., Bonn, 1848–9.
—— [1853] ‘Ueber die Kategorien des Aristoteles’, Sitzungsberichte der Wiener Akademie 10 (1853), 591–645 (repr.
Darmstadt, 1967).
—— [1870] Index Aristotelicus, Berlin, 1870 (vol. 5 of Bekker [1831]; cited as ‘IA’).
Boorse, C., [1976] ‘Wright on functions’, PR 85 (1976), 70–86.
Bostock, D., [1982] ‘Aristotle on the principles of change in Physics i’, in Schoﬁeld [1982], 179–96.
Bourgey, L., [1955] Observation et expérience chez Aristote, Paris, 1955. Chapter 3 reprinted as ‘Observation and experiment
in Aristotle’, in AA i, 175–82.
Boyd, R. N., [1980] ‘Materialism without reductionism’, in Block [1980], 67–106.
Bradley, F. H., [1927] Ethical Studies, 2nd edn., Oxford, 1927.
Brandt, R., [1974] ‘Untersuchungen zur politischen Philosophie des Aristoteles’, Hermes 102 (1974), 190–200.
Brandt, R. B., and Kim, J., [1963] ‘Wants as explanations of actions’, JP 60 (1963), 425–35.
Brody, B. A., [1972] ‘Towards an Aristotelian theory of scientiﬁc explanation’, Philosophy of Science 39 (1972), 20–31.
Brunschwig, J., [1964] ‘Dialectique et ontologie chez Aristote’, Revue Philosophique 89 (1964), 179–200.
—— [1967] (tr. and ed.) Aristote: Topiques i–iv, Paris, 1967.
—— [1979] ‘Forme, prédicat de la matière?’, in Etudes sur la Métaphysique d'Aristote, ed. P. Aubenque (Paris, 1979),
131–58.
Burnet, J., [1900] (ed.) Aristotle: Ethics, London, 1900.
Burnyeat, M. F., [1979] ‘Conﬂicting appearances’, PBA 65 (1979), 69–111.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

645

—— [1980] ‘Aristotle on learning to be good’, in EAE, 69–92.
—— [1980a] ‘Can the sceptic live his scepticism?’, in Barnes [1980], 20–33.
—— [1981] ‘Aristotle on understanding knowledge’, in Berti [1981], 97–139.
—— [1982] ‘Idealism in Greek philosophy’, in Idealism Past and Present, ed. G. N. A. Vesey (Cambridge, 1982), 19–50.
Also in PR 91 (1982), 3–40.
—— et al., [1979] Notes on Zeta, Oxford, 1979.
—— et al., [1984] Notes on Eta and Theta, Oxford, 1984.
Carnap, R., [1956] Meaning and Necessity, enlarged edn., Chicago, 1947.
Cartwright, H. M., [1970] ‘Quantities’, PR 79 (1970), 25–42.
—— [1972] ‘Chappell on stuff and things’, Nous 6 (1972), 369–77.
Cashdollar, S., [1973] ‘Aristotle's account of incidental perception’, Phr. 18 (1973), 156–75.
Chappell, V. C., [1970] ‘Stuff and things’, PAS 71 (1970–1), 61–76.
—— [1973] ‘Aristotle on matter’, JP 70 (1973), 679–96.
Charles, D. O. M., [1984] Aristotle's Philosophy of Action, London, 1984.
Charlton, W., [1970] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: Physics i–ii, Oxford, 1970.
—— [1972] ‘Aristotle and the principle of individuation’, Phr. 17 (1972), 239–49.
—— [1980] ‘Aristotle's deﬁnition of soul’, Phr. 25 (1980), 170–86.
—— [1983] ‘Prime matter—— a rejoinder’, Phr. 28 (1983), 197–211.
Chen, C. H., [1964] ‘The universal concrete’, Phr. 19 (1964), 48–57.
Cherniss, H. F., [1935] Aristotle's Criticism of Presocratic Philosophy, Baltimore, 1935.
—— [1944] Aristotle's Criticism of Plato and the Academy, i, Baltimore, 1944.
Chisholm, R. M., [1957] Perceiving, Ithaca, 1957.
—— [1982] The Foundations of Knowing, Minneapolis, 1982.
Churchland, P. M., [1984] Matter and Consciousness, Cambridge, Mass., 1984.
Clark, S. R. L., [1975] Aristotle's Man, Oxford, 1975.
Clatterbaugh, K. C., [1973] ‘Leibniz's doctrine of individual accidents’, Studia Leibnitiana, Sonderheft 4 (1973).
Coady, C. A. J., [1974] ‘The senses of Martians’, PR 83 (1974), 107–25.
Code, A., [1976] ‘Aristotle's response to Quine's objections to modal logic’, Jl. of Phil. Logic 5 (1976), 159–86.
—— [1976a] ‘The persistence of Aristotelian matter’, PS 29 (1976), 357–67.
—— [1978] ‘No universal is a substance’, in Paideia [1978], 65–74.
—— [1984] ‘The aporematic approach to primary being’, CJP Supp. 10 (1984), 41–65.
—— [1986] ‘Aristotle's investigation of a basic logical principle’, CJP 16 (1986), 341–57.
Cohen, G. A., [1978] Karl Marx's Theory of History: A Defence, Oxford, 1978.
Cohen, S. Marc, [1978] ‘Individual and essence in Aristotle's Metaphysics’, in Paideia [1978], 75–85.
—— [1984] ‘Aristotle and individuation’, CJP 10 (1984), 41–65.
—— [1986] ‘Aristotle on the Principle of Non-Contradiction’, CJP 16 (1986), 359–70.
Cohen, Sheldon M., [1984] ‘Aristotle's doctrine of the material substrate’, PR 93 (1984), 171–94.

646

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Colle, G., [1924] (tr. and ed.) Aristote: la Métaphysique, Livres ii–iii, Louvain, 1924), Livre iv, Louvain, 1931.
Cooper, J. M., [1975] Reason and Human Good in Aristotle, Cambridge, Mass., 1975.
—— [1977] ‘Aristotle on the forms of friendship’, RM 30 (1977), 619–48.
—— [1980] ‘Aristotle on friendship’, in EAE, 301–40.
—— [1981] Review of Kenny [1978], Nous 15 (1981), 381–92.
—— [1982] ‘Aristotle on natural teleology’, in Schoﬁeld [1982], 197–222.
—— [1985] ‘Hypothetical necessity’ in Gotthelf [1985], 151–67.
—— [1985a] ‘Aristotle on the goods of fortune’, PR 94 (1985), 173–96.
Copi, I. M., [1954] ‘Essence and accident’, in Moravcsik [1967], 149–66. From JP 51 (1954), 706–19.
Cousin, D. R., [1933] ‘Aristotle's doctrine of substance, Part I’, Mind 42 (1933), 319–39.
—— [1935] ‘Aristotle's doctrine of substance, Part II’, Mind 44 (1935), 168–85.
Cummins, R., [1975] ‘Functional analysis’, JP 72 (1975), 741–65.
Dancy, R. M., [1975] Sense and Contradiction, Dordrecht, 1975.
—— [1975a] ‘On some of Aristotle's ﬁrst thoughts about substances’, PR 84 (1975), 338–73.
—— [1978] ‘On some of Aristotle's second thoughts about substances’, PR 87 (1978), 372–413.
Davidson, D., [1963] ‘Actions, reasons, and causes’, in Davidson [1980], 3–19. From JP 60 (1953), 685–700.
—— [1970] ‘Mental events’, in Davidson [1980], 207–25. From Foster and Swanson [1970], 79–101.
—— [1975] ‘Thought and talk’, in Davidson [1984], 155–70. From Mind and Language, ed. S. D. Guttenplan (Oxford,
1975), 7–23.
—— [1976] ‘Hume's cognitive theory of pride’, in Davidson [1980], 277–90. From JP 73 (1976), 744–57.
—— [1980] Essays on Actions and Events, Oxford, 1980.
—— [1984] Essays on Truth and Interpretation, Oxford, 1984.
De Pater, W. A., [1965] Les Topiques d'Aristote et la dialectique platonicienne, Fribourg, 1965.
De Blic, J., [1930] ‘Un aspect remarquable de la dialectique aristotélicienne’, Gregorianum 11 (1930), 568–77.
De Ste Croix, G. E. M., [1981] The Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World, London, 1981.
Décarie, V., [1961] L'objet de la métaphysique selon Aristote, Montreal, 1961.
Dennett, D. C., [1969] Content and Consciousness, London, 1969.
—— [1971] ‘Intentional systems’, in Brainstorms (Cambridge, Mass., 1978), 3–22. From JP 68 (1971), 87–106.
Descartes, cited from Oeuvres de Descartes, ed. C. Adam and P. Tannery (Paris, rev. edn., 1964–76, cited as ‘AT’), usually
following Philosophical Writings of Descartes, tr. J. Cottingham et al., 2 vols. (Cambridge 1985).
—— Letters. tr. A. J. P. Kenny, Oxford, 1970.
Devereux, D. T., [1985] ‘The primacy of ousia’, in Platonic Investigations, ed. D. J. O'Meara (Washington, 1985), 219–46.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

647

—— [1986] ‘Aristotle's conception of practical knowledge’, RM 39 (1986), 483–504.
Diels, H., and Kranz, W., [1952] (eds.) Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. 10th edn., Berlin, 1952.
Driscoll, J., [1981] ‘Eidê in Aristotle's earlier and later theories of susbtance’, in O'Meara [1981], 129–59.
Duerlinger, J., [1970] ‘Predication and inherence in Aristotle's Categories’, Phr. 15 (1970), 179–203.
Düring, I., [1943] (ed.) Aristotle: De Partibus Animalium, Gothenburg, 1943.
—— [1961] ‘Aristotle's method in biology’, in Mansion [1961], 213–21.
—— and Owen, G. E. L. eds., [1960] Aristotle and Plato in the Mid-Fourth Century, Gothenburg, 1960.
Dworkin, R. M., [1973] ‘The Original Position’, in Reading Rawls, ed. N. Daniels (New York, 1975), 16–53. From Univ.
Chicago Law Rev. 40 (1973), 500–33.
Easterling, H. J., [1966] ‘A note on De Anima 413a8–9’, Phr. 11 (1966), 159–62.
Engberg-Pederson, T., [1979] ‘More on Aristotelian epagôgê’, Phr. 24 (1979), 301–19.
—— [1983] Aristotle's Theory of Moral Insight, Oxford, 1983.
Engmann, J., [1976] ‘Imagination and truth in Aristotle’, JHP 14 (1976), 259–65.
Eucken, R., [1870] Ueber die Methode und die Grundlagen der aristotelischen Ethik, Berlin, 1870.
Eucken, R., [1872] Die Methode der aristotelischen Forschung, Berlin, 1872.
Evans, J. D. G., [1974] ‘Aristotle on relativism’, PQ 24 (1974), 193–203.
—— [1977] Aristotle's Concept of Dialectic, Cambridge, 1977.
Falk, W. D., [1975] ‘Hume on practical reason’, PS 27 (1975), 1–18.
Ferejohn, M., [1980] ‘Aristotle on focal meaning and the unity of science’, Phr. 25 (1980), 117–28.
Fine, G. J., [1979] ‘Knowledge and logos in the Theaetetus’, PR 88 (1979), 366–97.
—— [1982] ‘Owen, Aristotle, and the Third Man’, Phr. 27 (1982), 13–33.
—— [1983] ‘Plato and Aristotle on form and substance’, Proc. Camb. Philol. Soc. 29 (1983), 23–47.
—— [1984] ‘Separation’, OSAP 2 (1984), 31–87.
—— [1987] ‘Forms as causes’, in Graeser [1987], 69–112.
—— [KPC] ‘Knowledge, perception, and change in the Theaetetus’, unpublished.
Finley, M. I., [1970] ‘Aristotle and economic analysis’, in AA ii, 140–58. From Past and Present 47 (1970), 3–25.
Förster, A., [1912] (ed.) Aristotelis De Anima, Budapest, 1912.
Fortenbaugh, W. W., [1975] Aristotle on Emotion, London, 1975.
Foster, L., and Swanson, J. W., eds. [1970] Experience and Theory, Amherst, 1970.
Frede, D., [1974] Comments on Hintikka [1972], Synthèse 28 (1974), 79–89.
Frede, M., [1978] ‘Individuals in Aristotle’, in Frede [1987a], 49–71. From Antike und Abendland 24 (1978), 16–39.

648

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Frede, M., [1981] ‘Categories in Aristotle’, in Frede [1987a], 29–48. From O'Meara [1981], 1–24.
—— [1985] ‘Substance in Aristotle's Metaphysics’, in Frede [1987a], 72–80. From Gotthelf [1985], 17–26.
—— [1987] ‘The unity of special and general metaphysics’, in Frede [1987a], 81–95.
—— [1987a] Essays in Ancient Philosophy, Oxford, 1987.
Furley, D. J., [1985] ‘The rainfall example in Physics ii 8’, in Gotthelf [1985], 177–82.
Furth, M., [1978] ‘Trans-temporal stability in Aristotelian substances’, JP 75 (1978), 627–32.
—— [1985] (trans.) Aristotle: Metaphysics vii–x, Indianapolis, 1985.
—— [1986] ‘A note on Aristotle's Principle of Non-Contradiction’, CJP 16 (1986), 371–81.
Gauthier, R. A., and Jolif, J. Y., [1970] (eds. and trs.) Aristote: l' Ethique à Nicomaque, 2nd edn., 4 vols., Louvain, 1970.
Geach, P. T., [1957] Mental Acts, London, 1957.
Gewirth, A., [1953] Review of 1st edn. (1951) of Owens [1963], PR 62 (1953), 577–89.
Gillespie, C. M., [1925] ‘The Aristotelian categories’, in AA iii, 1–12. From CQ 19 (1925), 75–84.
Goldman, A., [1970] A Theory of Human Action, Englewood Cliffs, 1970.
Goodman, N., [1968] Languages of Art, New York, 1968.
—— [1970] ‘Seven strictures on similarity’, in Problems and Projects (New York, 1972), 437–46. From Foster and
Swanson [1970], 19–29.
Gotthelf, A., [1976] ‘Aristotle's conception of ﬁnal causality’, RM 30 (1976), 226–54.
—— ed., [1985] Aristotle on Nature and Living Things, Pittsburgh, 1985.
Graeser, A., ed., [1987] Mathematik und Metaphysik bei Aristoteles, Berne, 1987.
Graham, W., [1975] ‘Counterpredicability and per se accidents’, AGP 57 (1975), 182–7.
Granger, H., [1981] ‘The differentia and the per se accident in Aristotle’, AGP 63 (1981), 118–29.
Green, T. H., [1890] Philosophical Works, 3 vols., London, 1890.
Greenwood, L. H. G., [1909] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics vi, Cambridge, 1909.
Grice, H. P., [1962] ‘Some remarks about the senses’, in Analytical Philosophy (First Series), ed. R. J. Butler (Oxford,
1962), 133–53.
Grote, G., [1872] Aristotle, 2 vols., London, 1872.
Guthrie, W. K. C., [1957] ‘Aristotle as historian’, in Studies in Presocratic Philosophy, ed. D. J. Furley and R. E. Allen (vol. 1,
London, 1970), 239–54. From JHS 77 (1957), 35–41.
Hadgopoulos, D. J., [1976] ‘The deﬁnition of the “predicables” in Aristotle’, Phr. 21 (1976), 59–63.
Hager, F. P., ed., [1969] Metaphysik und Theologie des Aristoteles, Darmstadt, 1969.
—— ed., [1972] Logik und Erkenntnislehre des Aristoteles, Darmstadt, 1972.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

649

Hamblin, C. L., [1970] Fallacies, London, 1970.
Hamelin, O., [1920] Le système d'Aristote, Paris, 1920.
Hamlyn, D. W., [1959] ‘Aristotle's account of aesthesis in the De Anima’, CQ 9 (1959), 6–16.
—— [1968] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: De Anima, Oxford, 1968.
—— [1968a] ‘Koinê aesthêsis’, Monist 52 (1968), 195–200.
—— [1976] ‘Aristotelian epagôgê’, Phr. 21 (1976), 167–84.
—— [1977] ‘Focal meaning’, PAS 78 (1977–8), 1–18.
Happ, H., [1971] Hyle, Berlin, 1971.
Hardie, W. F. R., [1964] ‘Aristotle's treatment of the relation between the soul and the body’, PQ 14 (1964), 53–72.
—— [1976] ‘Concepts of consciousness in Aristotle’, Mind 85 (1976), 388–411.
—— [1980] Aristotle's Ethical Theory, 2nd edn., Oxford, 1980.
Hare, J. E., [1979] ‘Aristotle and the deﬁnition of natural things’, Phr. 24 (1979), 168–79.
Haring, E. S., [1956] ‘Substantial form in Metaphysics vii’, RM 10 (1956–7), 308–32, 482–501, 698–713.
Harter, E. D., [1975] ‘Aristotle on primary ousia’, AGP 57 (1975), 1–20.
Hartman, E., [1977] Substance, Body and Soul, Princeton, 1977.
Heinaman, R. E., [1979] ‘Aristotle's tenth aporia’, AGP 61 (1979), 249–70.
—— [1980] ‘An argument in Metaphysics Z 13’, CQ 30 (1980), 72–85.
—— [1981] ‘Non-substantial individuals in Aristotle's Categories’, Phr. 26 (1981), 295–307.
—— [1981a] ‘Knowledge of substance in Aristotle’, JHS 101 (1981), 63–77.
—— [1982] Review of Lloyd [1981], CR 32 (1982), 44–8.
Hess, W., [1970] ‘Erfahrung und Intuition bei Aristoteles’, Phr. 15 (1970), 48–82.
Hicks, R. D., [1907] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: De Anima, Cambridge, 1907.
Hintikka, K. J. J., [1972] ‘On the ingredients of an Aristotelian science’, Nous 6 (1972), 55–69.
—— [1973] Time and Necessity, Oxford, 1973.
—— [1974] Reply to Frede [1974], Synthèse 28 (1974), 91–6.
—— [1977] Aristotle on Modality and Determinism, Amsterdam, 1977.
Hirst, R. J., [1965] ‘Form and sensation’, SPAS 39 (1965), 155–72.
Hocutt, M., [1974] ‘Aristotle's four becauses’, Phil. 49 (1974), 385–99.
Homiak, M. L., [1981] ‘Virtue and self-love in Aristotle's ethics’, CJP 11 (1981), 633–51.
Hudson, S. D., [1981] ‘Reason and motivation in Aristotle’, CJP 11 (1981), 111–35.
Hume, Inquiries, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge, Oxford, 1902.
Hume, Treatise of Human Nature, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge, Oxford, 1888.
Hursthouse, R., [1980] ‘A false doctrine of the mean’, PAS 81 (1980–1), 57–72.
Husik, I., [1906] ‘Aristotle on the law of contradiction and the basis of the syllogism’, in Husik [1952a], 87–95. From
Mind 15 (1906), 215–22.
—— [1952] Philosophical Essays, Oxford, 1952.
—— [1952a] ‘The Categories of Aristotle’, in Husik [1952], 96–112.
Hussey, E. L., [1983] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: Physics iii–iv, Oxford, 1983.

650

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ide, H. A., [1987] ‘Potentiality and Possibility’, PhD thesis, Cornell University, 1987.
Inwood, B., [1979] ‘A note on commensurate universals in the Posterior Analytics’, Phr. 24 (1979), 320–9.
Irwin, T. H., [1977a] Plato's Moral Theory, Oxford, 1977.
—— [1980] ‘Reason and responsibility in Aristotle’, in EAE, 117–56.
—— [1980a] Review of Kenny, [1978], [1979], JP 77 (1980), 338–54.
—— [1981] ‘Homonymy in Aristotle’, RM 34 (1981), 523–44.
—— [1981a] ‘Aristotle's methods of ethics’, in O'Meara [1981], 193–223.
—— [1982] ‘Aristotle's concept of signiﬁcation’, in Schoﬁeld [1982], 241–66.
—— [1985] ‘Permanent happiness’, OSAP 3 (1985), 89–124.
—— [1985a] ‘Aristotle's concept of morality’, in Proc. Boston Colloquium in Ancient Phil., ed. J. J. Cleary (Washington,
1986), 115–43.
—— [1986] Review of Charles, Phr. 31 (1986), 68–89.
Jaeger, W. W., [1912] Studien zur Entstehungsgeschichte der Metaphysik des Aristoteles, Berlin, 1912.
—— [1948] Aristotle: Fundamentals of the History of his Development, ET, 2nd edn., Oxford, 1948.
Joachim, H. H. (ed.), [1922] Aristotle on Coming-To-Be and Passing-Away, Oxford, 1922.
—— [1951] Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics, Oxford, 1951.
Jones, B., [1972] ‘Individuals in Aristotle's Categories’, Phr. 17 (1972), 107–23.
—— [1974] ‘Aristotle's introduction of matter’, PR 83 (1974), 474–500.
—— [1975] ‘Introduction to the ﬁrst ﬁve chapters of Aristotle's Categories’, Phr. 20 (1975), 146–72.
Jope, J., [1972] ‘Subordinate demonstrative science in the sixth book of Aristotle's Physics’, CQ 22 (1972), 279–92.
Joseph, H. W. B., [1906] An Introduction to Logic, Oxford, 1906.
Kahn, C. H., [1966] ‘Sensation and consciousness in Aristotle's psychology’, in AA iv, 1–31. From AGP 48 (1966),
43–81.
—— [1978] ‘Questions and categories’, in Questions, ed. H. Hiz (Dordrecht, 1978), 227–78.
—— [1981] ‘The role of nous in the cognition of ﬁrst principles’, in Berti [1981], 385–414.
—— [1981a] ‘Aristotle and altruism’, Mind 90 (1981), 20–40.
Kant, Critique of Pure Reason (cited as ‘KrV’), tr. N. Kemp Smith, London, 1929.
—— Philosophical Correspondence, ed. A. Zweig, Chicago, 1967.
Kapp, E., [1920] ‘Die Kategorienlehre in der aristotelischen Topik’, in Ausgewählte Schriften (Berlin, 1968), 215–53.
Kenny, A. J. P., [1967] ‘The argument from illusion in Aristotle's Metaphysics’, Mind 76 (1967), 184–97.
—— [1978] The Aristotelian Ethics, Oxford, 1978.
—— [1979] Aristotle's Theory of the Will, London, 1979.
Keyt, D., [1983] ‘Intellectualism in Aristotle’, in Anton and Preus [1983], 364–87.
King, H. R., [1956] ‘Aristotle without materia prima’, JHI 17 (1956), 370–89.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

651

Kirwan, C. A., [1970] ‘How strong are the objections to essence?’, PAS 71 (1970–1), 43–59.
—— [1971] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: Metaphysics iv, v, vi, Oxford, 1971.
—— [1981] ‘Truth and universal assent’, CJP 11 (1981), 377–94.
Kneale, W. C., [1939] ‘The notion of a substance’, PAS 40 (1939–40), 101–34.
—— [1962] ‘Modality de dicto and de re’, in Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science, ed. E. Nagel et al., (Stanford, 1962),
622–34.
Konstan, D., [1975] ‘A note on Physics i 1’, AGP 57 (1975), 241–5.
Kosman, L. A., [1966] ‘Aristotle's ﬁrst predicament’, RM 20 (1966–7), 483–506.
—— [1969] ‘Aristotle's deﬁnition of motion’, Phr. 14 (1969), 40–62.
—— [1973] ‘Understanding, explanation, and insight in the Posterior Analytics’, in Lee [1973], 374–92.
—— [1975] ‘Perceiving that we perceive’, PR 84 (1975), 499–519.
—— [1984] ‘Substance, being, and energeia’, OSAP 2 (1984), 121–49.
Kraut, R., [1979] ‘The peculiar function of human beings’, CJP 9 (1979), 467–78.
—— [1979a] ‘Two conceptions of happiness’, PR 88 (1979), 167–97.
Kullmann, W., [1974] Wissenschaft und Methode, Berlin, 1974.
—— [1980] ‘Der Mensch als politisches Lebewesen bei Aristoteles’, Hermes 109 [1980], 419–43.
Kung, J., [1977] ‘Aristotle on essence and explanation’, PS 31 (1977), 361–83.
—— [1978] ‘Can substance be predicated of matter?’, AGP 60 (1978), 140–59.
—— [1981] ‘Aristotle on thises, suches and the Third Man Argument’, Phr. 26 (1981), 207–47.
Lacey, A. R., [1965] ‘Ousia and form in Aristotle’, Phr. 10 (1965), 54–69.
Le BLond, J. M., [1939] Logique et méthode chez Aristote, Paris, 1939.
—— [1945] (tr. and ed.) Aristote: philosophe de la vie, Paris, 1945.
Lear, J., [1980] Aristotle and Logical Theory, Cambridge, 1980.
—— [1982] ‘Aristotle on mathematics’, PR 91 (1982), 161–92.
—— [1987] ‘Active epistêmê’, in Graeser [1987], 149–74.
Lee, E. N., Mourelatos, A. P. D., and Rorty, R. M., eds., [1973] Exegesis and Argument, Assen, 1973.
Lee, H. D. P., [1935] ‘Geometrical method and Aristotle's account of ﬁrst principles’, CQ 29 (1935), 113–24.
Lefevre, C., [1972] Sur l'évolution d'Aristote en psychologie, Louvain, 1972.
Leibniz, The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence, tr. H. G. Alexander, Manchester, 1956.
Lennox, J. G., [1985] ‘Are Aristotle's species eternal?’, in Gotthelf [1985], 67–94.
Lesher, J. H., [1971] ‘Substance, form and universal: a dilemma’, Phr. 16 (1971), 169–78.
—— [1973] ‘The meaning of nous in the Posterior Analytics’, Phr. 18 (1973), 44–68.
Leszl, W., [1970] Logic and Metaphysics in Aristotle, Padua, 1970.
—— [1972] ‘Knowledge of the universal and knowledge of the particular in Aristotle’, RM 26 (1972–3), 278–313.

652

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Leszl, W., [1975] Aristotle's Conception of Ontology, Padua, 1975.
Lewis, F. A., [1984] ‘What is Aristotle's theory of essence?’, CJP Supp. 10 (1984), 89–131.
Lloyd, A. C., [1966] ‘Aristotle's Categories today’, PQ 16 (1966), 258–67.
—— [1970] ‘Aristotle's principle of individuation’, Mind 79 (1970), 519–29.
—— [1981] Form and Universal in Aristotle, Liverpool, 1981.
—— [1981a] ‘Necessity and essence in the Posterior Analytics’, in Berti [1981], 151–71.
Lloyd, G. E. R., and Owen, G. E. L., eds., [1978] Aristotle on Mind and the Senses, Cambridge, 1978.
Locke, Essay concerning Human Understanding, ed. P. H. Nidditch, Oxford, 1975.
Long, A. A., [1981] ‘Aristotle and the history of Greek scepticism’, in O'Meara [1981], 79–106.
Loux, M. J., [1973] ‘Aristotle on the transcendentals’, Phr. 18 (1973), 225–39.
—— [1979] ‘Form, species, and predication’, Mind 88 (1979), 1–23.
Lukasiewicz, J., [1910] ‘Aristotle on the law of contradiction’, in AA iii, 50–62. From Bulletin Internationale de l'Académie
des Sciences de Cracovie, 1910.
Lycos, K., [1964] ‘Aristotle and Plato on appearing’, Mind 73 (1964), 496–514.
McClelland, R. T., [1981] ‘Time and modality in Aristotle’, AGP 63 (1981), 130–49.
McDowell, J. H., [1978] ‘Are moral requirements hypothetical imperatives?’, SPAS 52 (1978), 13–29.
—— [1980] ‘The role of eudaimonia in Aristotle's ethics’, in EAE, 359–76. From Proc. African Class. Assoc. 15 (1980),
1–15.
Maier, H., [1896] Die Syllogistik des Aristoteles, Tübingen, 1896–1900.
Malcolm, J., [1981] ‘On the generation and corruption of the categories’, RM 33 (1981), 662–81.
Malcolm, N., [1968] ‘The conceivability of mechanism’, PR 77 (1968), 45–72. Also in Free Will, ed. G. Watson (Oxford,
1982), 127–49.
—— [1972] ‘Thoughtless brutes’, in Thought and Knowledge (Ithaca, 1977), 40–57. From Proc. Amer. Philos. Ass. 46
(1972–3), 5–20.
Manicas, P. T., [1965] ‘Aristotle, dispositions, and occult powers’, RM 18 (1965), 678–89.
Mansion, A., [1946] Introduction à la physique aristotélicienne, 2nd edn., Louvain, 1946.
—— [1958] ‘Philosophie première, philosophie seconde et métaphysique chez Aristote’, Revue Philosophique de Louvain
56 (1958), 165–221.
Mansion, S., [1955] ‘Les apories de la métaphysique aristotélicienne’, in Autour d'Aristote (Louvain, 1955), 141–79.
—— ed., [1961] Aristote et les problèmes de méthode, Louvain, 1961.
Mates, B., [1986] The Philosophy of Leibniz, Oxford, 1986.
Matthews, G. B., [1977] ‘Consciousness and life’, Phil. 52 (1977), 13–26.
—— [1982] ‘Accidental unities’, in Schoﬁeld [1982], 223–40.
—— and Cohen, S. M., [1967] ‘The one and the many’, RM 21 (1967–8), 630–55.
Meikle, S., [1979] ‘Aristotle and the political economy of the polis’, JHS 99 (1979), 57–73.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

653

—— [1985] Essentialism in the Thought of Karl Marx, London, 1985.
Merlan, P., [1957] ‘Metaphysik: Name und Gegenstand’, in Merlan [1976], 189–94, and Hager [1969], 251–65. From
JHS 77 (1957), 87–92.
—— [1960] From Platonism to Neoplatonism, 2nd edn., The Hague, 1960.
—— [1968] ‘On the terms “Metaphysics” and “Being-qua-being” ’, in Merlan [1976], 238–58. From Monist 52 (1968),
174–94.
—— [1976] Kleine philosophische Schriften, Hildesheim, 1976.
Mignucci, M., [1981] ‘Hôs epi to polu et nécessaire’, in Berti [1981], 173–203.
Miller, F. D., [1973] ‘Did Aristotle have a concept of identity?’, PR 82 (1973), 483–90.
—— and Bradie, M., [1984] ‘Teleology and natural necessity in Aristotle’, HPQ 1 (1984), 133–46.
Miller, R. W., [1981] ‘Marx and Aristotle’, CJP Supp. 7 (1981), 323–52.
Modrak, D. K., [1979] ‘Forms, types, and tokens’, JHP 17 (1979), 371–81.
—— [1981] ‘Common sense and the discrimination of sensible differences’, CJP 11 (1981), 405–23.
Moline, J., [1975] ‘Provided nothing external interferes’, Mind 84 (1975), 244–54.
Moore, F. C. T., [1975] ‘Evans off target’, PQ 25 (1975), 58–9.
Moore, G. E., [1923] ‘Are the characteristics of particular things universal or particular?’, in Philosophical Papers
(London, 1959), 17–31. From SPAS 3 (1923), 95–113.
Moraux, P., [1961] ‘La méthode d'Aristote dans l'étude du ciel’, in Mansion [1961], 173–94.
—— [1968] ‘La joute dialectique’, in Owen [1968a], 277–311.
Moravcsik, J. M. E., [1967] ‘Aristotle on predication’, PR 76 (1967), 80–96.
—— [1967a] ‘Aristotle's theory of categories’, in Moravcsik [1967b], 125–45.
—— ed., [1967b] Aristotle, Garden City, 1967.
—— [1974] ‘Aristotle on adequate explanation’, Synthèse 28 (1974), 3–17.
—— [1975] ‘Aitia as generative factor in Aristotle's philosophy’, Dialogue 14 (1975), 622–38.
Morrison, D. R., [1985] ‘Separation in Aristotle's metaphysics’, OSAP 3 (1985), 125–57.
Mourelatos, A. P. D., [1967] ‘Aristotle's “powers” and modern empiricism’, Ratio 9 (1967), 97–104.
Mueller, I., [1970] ‘Aristotle on geometrical objects’, AGP 52 (1970), 156–71.
Mulgan, R. G., [1970] ‘Aristotle and the democratic conception of freedom’, in Auckland Classical Essays, ed. B. F.
Harris (Auckland, 1970), 95–111.
—— [1974] ‘Aristotle's doctrine that man is a political animal’, Hermes 102 (1974), 438–45.
—— [1977] Aristotle's Political Theory, Oxford, 1977.
Mure, G. R. G., [1949] ‘Aristotle's doctrine of secondary substances’, Mind 58 (1949), 82–3.
—— [1975] ‘Cause and because in Aristotle’, Phil. 50 (1975), 356–7.
Nagel, T., [1970] ‘Armstrong on the mind’, in Block [1980], 200–7. From PR 79 (1970), 394–403.
—— [1970a] The Possibility of Altruism, Oxford, 1970.

654

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Nagel, T., [1972] ‘Aristotle on eudaimonia’, in EAE, 7–14. From Phr. 17 (1972), 252–9.
Newman, W. L., [1887] (ed.) Aristotle: Politics, 4 vols., Oxford, 1887–1902.
—— [1892] ‘Aristotle's classiﬁcation of forms of government’, CR 6 (1892), 289–93.
Noonan, H. W., [1976] ‘An argument of Aristotle's on non-contradiction’, Analysis 37 (1976–7), 163–9.
Nozick, R., [1974] Anarchy, State, and Utopia, New York, 1974.
Nussbaum, M. C., [1978] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: De Motu Animalium, Princeton, 1978.
—— [1984] ‘Aristotelian dualism’, OSAP 2 (1984), 197–207.
—— [1986] The Fragility of Goodness, Cambridge, 1986.
Nuyens, F., [1948] L'évolution de la psychologie d'Aristote, Louvain, 1948.
O'Meara, D. J., ed., [1981] Studies in Aristotle, Washington, 1981.
Owen, G. E. L., [1960] ‘Logic and metaphysics in some early works of Aristotle’, in Owen [1986], 180–9, and AA iii,
13–32. From Düring [1960], 163–90.
—— [1961] ‘Tithenai ta phainomena’, in Owen [1986], 239–51, and in AA i, 113–26. From Mansion [1961], 83–103.
—— [1965] ‘The Platonism of Aristotle’, in Owen [1986], 200–20, and in AA i, 14–34. From PBA 51 (1965), 125–50.
—— [1965a] ‘Aristotle on the snares of ontology’, in Owen [1986], 259–78. From Bambrough [1965], 69–95.
—— [1965b] ‘Inherence’, in Owen [1986], 252–8. From Phr. 10 (1965), 97–105.
—— [1968] ‘Dialectic and eristic in the treatment of the Forms’, in Owen [1986], 221–38. From Owen [1968a],
103–25.
—— ed., [1968a] Aristotle on Dialectic, Oxford, 1968.
—— [1978] ‘Particular and general’, in Owen [1986], 279–94. From PAS 79 (1978–9), 1–21.
—— [1986] Logic, Science, and Dialectic, London, 1986.
Owens, J., [1960] ‘Aristotle on categories’, in Aristotle: Collected Papers (Albany, 1981), ch.2. From RM 14 (1960), 73–90.
—— [1963] The Doctrine of Being in the Aristotelian Metaphysics, 2nd edn., Toronto, 1963 (1st edn., 1951).
Paideia: Special Aristotle Issue, Brockport, 1978.
Parﬁt, D. A., [1984] Reasons and Persons, Oxford, 1984.
Patzig, G., [1960] ‘Theology and ontology in Aristotle's Metaphysics’, in AA iii, 33–49. From KS 52 (1960–1), 185–205.
Peck, A. L., [1937] (tr.) Aristotle: Parts of Animals, London, 1937.
—— [1953] (tr.) Aristotle: Generation of Animals, London, rev. edn., 1953.
Penner, T., [1970] ‘Verbs and the identity of actions’, in Ryle, ed. G. Pitcher and O. P. Wood (Garden City, 1970),
393–460.
Popper, K. R., [1953] ‘The principle of individuation’, SPAS 27 (1953), 97–120.
Preisewerk, A., [1939] ‘Das Einzelne bei Aristoteles’, Philologus Supp. 32.1 (1939).
Putnam, H., [1975] ‘Philosophy and our mental life’, in Philosophical Papers ii (Cambridge, 1975), 281–303.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

655

—— [1983] ‘Why there isn't a ready-made world’, in Philosophical Papers iii (Cambridge, 1983), 205–28.
Quine, W. V., [1966] The Ways of Paradox, New York, 1966.
Rackham, H., [1935] (tr.) Aristotle: Eudemian Ethics, London, 1935.
Raphael, S., [1974] ‘Rhetoric, dialectic and syllogistic argument’, Phr. 19 (1974), 153–67.
Rassow, H., [1874] Forschungen über die Nikomachische Ethik, Weimar, 1874.
Rawls, J., [1971] A Theory of Justice, Cambridge, Mass., 1971.
Reale, G., [1980] The Concept of First Philosophy and the Unity of Aristotle's Metaphysics, ET, Albany, 1980.
Rees, D. A., [1957] ‘Bipartition of the soul in the early Academy’, JHS 77 (1957), 112–18.
—— [1960] ‘Theories of the soul in the early Aristotle’, in Düring [1960], 191–200.
—— [1971] ‘Aristotle's treatment of phantasia’, in Anton [1971], 491–505.
Régis, L. M., [1935] L'opinion selon Aristote, Ottawa, 1935.
Reichenbach, H., [1951] The Rise of Scientiﬁc Philosophy, Berkeley, 1951.
Reiner, H., [1954] ‘Die Entstehung und ursprünglische Bedeutung des Namens Metaphysik’, in Hager [1969], 139–74.
From Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung 8 (1954), 210–37.
Robinson, H. M., [1974] ‘Prime matter in Aristotle’, Phr. 19 (1974), 168–88.
—— [1978] ‘Mind and body in Aristotle’, CQ 28 (1978), 105–24.
—— [1983] ‘Aristotelian dualism’, OSAP 1 (1983), 123–44.
Robinson, R., [1962] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: Politics iii–iv, Oxford, 1962.
Rodier, G., [1900] (tr. and ed.) Aristote: Traité de l'âme, Paris, 1900.
Rorty, A. O., ed., [1980] Essays on Aristotle's Ethics, Berkeley, 1980.
Rorty, R. M., [1970] ‘Incorrigibility as the mark of the mental’, JP 67 (1970), 399–424.
—— [1973] ‘Genus as matter: a reading of Metaphysics vii–viii’, in Lee [1973], 393–420.
Ross, W. D., [1923] Aristotle, London, 1923.
—— [1924] (ed.) Aristotle: Metaphysics, 2 vols., Oxford, 1924.
—— [1936] (ed.) Aristotle: Physics, Oxford, 1936.
—— [1939] ‘The discovery of the syllogism’, PR 48 (1939), 251–72.
—— [1949] (ed.) Aristotle: Prior and Posterior Analytics, Oxford, 1949.
—— [1955] (ed.) Aristotle: Parva Naturalia, Oxford, 1955.
—— [1957] ‘The development of Aristotle's thought’, in AA i, 1–13, and in Düring [1960], 63–78. From PBA 43
(1957), 63–78.
—— [1961] (ed.) Aristotle: De Anima, Oxford, 1961.
Routila, L., [1969] Die aristotelische Idee der ersten Philosophie, Amsterdam, 1969.
Rowe, C. J., [1977] ‘Aims and methods in Aristotle's Politics’, CQ 27 (1977), 159–72.
Ryle, G., [1965] ‘Dialectic in the Academy’, in Bambrough [1965], 39–68. Another version in Owen [1968a], 69–79.
Sachs, D., [1948] ‘Does Aristotle have a doctrine of secondary substances?’, Mind 57 (1948), 221–5.

656

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sauvé, S. M., [1987] ‘Aristotle's causal discriminations: teleology and responsibility’, PhD thesis, Cornell
University, 1987.
Schoﬁeld, M., [1972] ‘Metaphysics vii 3; some suggestions’, Phr. 17 (1972), 97–101.
—— [1978] ‘Aristotle on the imagination’, in AA iv, 102–32. From Lloyd [1978], 99–140.
—— and Nussbaum, M. C., eds., [1982] Language and Logos, Cambridge, 1982.
Scholar, M. C., [1971] ‘Aristotle's Metaphysics iv, 1010b1–3’, Mind 80 (1971), 266–8.
Sellars, W. S., [1957] ‘Substance and form in Aristotle’, in Sellars [1967a], 125–36. From JP 54 (1957), 688–99.
—— [1963] ‘Raw materials, subjects, and substrata’, in Sellars [1967a], 137–53. From The Concept of Matter in Greek and
Mediaeval Philosophy, ed. E. McMullin (Notre Dame, 1963), 259–72.
—— [1967] ‘Aristotle's Metaphysics’, in Sellars [1967a], 73–124.
—— [1967a] Philosophical Perspectives, Springﬁeld, Ill., 1967.
Sharples, R. W., [1983] (tr. and ed.) Alexander: De Fato, London, 1983.
Shields, C. J., [1986] ‘Aristotle's philosophy of mind’, PhD thesis, Cornell University, 1986.
—— [1988] ‘Soul and body in Aristotle’, OSAP 6 (1988), 103–37.
Shoemaker, S., [1977] ‘Immortality and dualism’, in Identity, Cause, and Mind (Cambridge, 1984), 141–53. From Reason
and Religion, ed. S. C. Brown (Ithaca, 1977), 259–81.
Sidgwick, H., [1879] ‘The establishment of ethical ﬁrst principles’, Mind 4 (1879), 106–11.
—— [1892] ‘Aristotle's classiﬁcation of forms of government’, CR 6 (1892), 141–4.
—— [1907] The Methods of Ethics, 7th edn., London, 1907.
Slakey, T. J., [1961] ‘Aristotle on sense perception’, PR 70 (1961), 470–84.
Smith, J. A., [1921] ‘Tode ti in Aristotle’, CR 35 (1921), 19.
—— and Ross, W. D., [1910] (eds.) The Works of Aristotle (cited as ‘TO’) 12 vols., Oxford, 1910–52.
Sokolowski, R., [1970] ‘Matter, elements, and substance in Aristotle’, JHP 8 (1970), 263–88.
Solmsen, F., [1929] Die Entwicklung der aristotelischen Logik und Rhetorik, Berlin, 1929.
—— [1958] ‘Aristotle and prime matter’, in Solmsen [1968a], i, 397–406. From JHI 19 (1958), 243–52.
—— [1961] ‘Aristotle's word for matter’, in Solmsen [1968a], i, 407–20. From Didascaliae: Studies in honour of A. M.
Albareda (New York, 1961), 395–408.
—— [1964] ‘Leisure and play in Aristotle's ideal state’, in Solmsen [1968a], ii, 1–28. From Rheinische Museum 107 (1964)
193–220.
—— [1968] ‘Dialectic without the Forms’, in Owen [1968a], 49–68.
—— [1968a] Kleine Schriften, i–ii, Hildesheim, 1968.
Sorabji, R. R. K., [1971] ‘Aristotle on demarcating the ﬁve senses’, in AA iv, 76–92. From PR 80 (1971), 55–79.
—— [1973] ‘Aristotle on the role of the intellect in virtue’, in EAE, 201–19. From PAS 74 (1973–4), 107–29.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

657

—— [1974] ‘Body and soul in Aristotle’, in AA iv, 42–64. From Phil. 49 (1974), 63–89.
—— [1980] Necessity, Cause, and Blame, London, 1980.
—— [1981] ‘Deﬁnitions: why necessary and in what way?’, in Berti [1981], 205–44.
—— [1985] ‘Analyses of matter, ancient and modern’, PAS 86 (1985–6), 1–22.
Sprague, R. K., [1968] ‘The four causes: Aristotle's analysis and ours’, Monist 52 (1968), 298–300.
Stahl, D., [1981] ‘Stripped away’, Phr. 26 (1981), 177–80.
Stalnaker, R. C., [1984] Inquiry, Cambridge, Mass., 1984.
Stebbing, L. S., [1929] ‘Concerning substance’, PAS 30 (1929–30), 285–308.
Stewart, J. A., [1892] Notes on the Nicomachean Ethics, 2 vols., Oxford, 1892.
Stich, S. P., [1983] From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science, Cambridge, Mass., 1983.
Stocks, J. L., [1936] ‘Scholê’, CQ 30 (1936), 177–87.
Stough, C. L., [1972] ‘Language and ontology in the Categories’, JHP 10 (1972), 261–72.
Strawson, P. F., [1959] Individuals, London, 1959.
Sturgeon, N. L., [HRP] ‘Hume on reason and passion’, unpublished.
Sykes, R. D., [1975] ‘Form in Aristotle’, Phil. 50 (1975), 311–31.
Taylor, C., [1964] The Explanation of Behaviour, London, 1964.
—— [1966] ‘Teleological explanation’, Analysis 27 (1966), 141–3.
—— [1967] ‘Mind-body identity, a side issue?’, PR 76 (1967), 201–13.
—— [1970] ‘The explanation of purposive behaviour’, in Explanation in the Behavioural Sciences, ed. R. Borger and F.
Ciofﬁ (Cambridge, 1970), 49–79 (with reply, 89–95).
Taylor, C. C. W., [1980] ‘All perceptions are true’, in Barnes [1980], 105–24.
Teichmüller, G., [1879] Neue Studien zur Geschichte der Begriffe, 3 vols., Gotha, 1879.
Thurot, C., [1860] Etudes sur Aristote, Paris, 1860.
Tiles, J. E., [1983] ‘Why the triangle has two right angles kath'hauto’, Phr. 28 (1983), 1–16.
Todd, R. B., [1976] ‘The four causes; Aristotle's explanation and the ancients'’, JHI 37 (1976), 319–22.
Torstrik, A., [1862] (ed.) Aristotelis De Anima, Berlin, 1862.
—— [1875] ‘Peri tuchês kai tou automatou’, Hermes 9 (1875), 425–70.
Tracy, T., [1983] ‘Heart and soul in Aristotle’, in Anton [1983], 321–39.
Trendelenburg, F. A., [1846] Geschichte der Kategorienlehre, Berlin, 1846.
Urmson, J. O., [1973] ‘Aristotle's doctrine of the mean’, in EAE, 157–70. From Amer. Phil. Quart. 10 (1973), 223–30.
Van Fraassen, B. C., [1980] ‘A reexamination of Aristotle's philosophy of science’, Dialogue 19 (1980), 20–45.
Vendler, Z., [1972] Res Cogitans, Ithaca, 1972.
Viano, C. A., [1958] ‘La dialettica in Aristotele’, Rivista di Filosoﬁa 49 (1958), 154–78.
Vlastos, G., [1980] Review of Wood and Wood [1978], Phoenix 34 (1980), 347–52.
—— [1983] ‘The Socratic elenchus’, OSAP 1 (1983), 27–58.

658

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Von Arnim, H., [1905] (ed.) Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta, 4 vols., Leipzig, 1905–24.
—— [1928] Review of Jaeger, Wiener Studien 46 (1928), 1–48.
Von Wright, G. H., [1971] Explanation and Understanding, Ithaca, 1971.
Waitz, T., [1844] (ed.) Aristotelis Organon, 2 vols., Leipzig, 1844–6.
Wallace, J. D., [1978] Virtues and Vices, Ithaca, 1978.
Waterlow, S., [1982] Nature, Change, and Agency, Oxford, 1982.
Wedin, V. E., [1973] ‘A remark on per se accidents and properties’, AGP 55 (1973), 30–5.
Weil, E., [1951] ‘The place of logic in Aristotle's thought’, in AA i, 88–112.
From Revue de Métaphysique et Morale 56 (1951), 283–315.
White, N. P., [1971] ‘Aristotle on sameness and oneness’, PR 80 (1971), 177–97.
—— [1972] ‘Origins of Aristotle's essentialism’, RM 26 (1972–3), 57–85.
—— [1981] ‘Goodness and human aims in Aristotle's Ethics’, in O'Meara [1981], 225–46.
Whiting, J. E., [1984] ‘Individual forms in Aristotle’, PhD thesis, Cornell University, 1984.
—— [1986] ‘Form and individuation in Aristotle’, HPQ 3 (1986), 359–77.
—— [1986a] ‘Human nature and intellectualism in Aristotle’, AGP 68 (1986), 70–95.
—— [AFA] ‘Aristotle's function argument; a defence’, Ancient Philosophy 8 (1988), 33–48.
Wieland, W., [1960] ‘Aristotle's Physics and the problem of inquiry into principles’, in AA i, 127–40. From KS 52
(1960–1), 206–19.
—— [1970] Die aristotelische Physik, 2nd edn., Göttingen, 1970.
—— [1975] ‘The problem of teleology’, in AA i, 140–60. From Wieland [1970].
Wiggins, D. R. P., [1967] Identity and Spatio-Temporal Continuity, Oxford, 1967.
—— [1980] Sameness and Substance, Oxford, 1980.
Wilkes, K. V., [1978] ‘The good man and the good for man’, in EAE, 341–57. From Mind (1978), 553–71.
Williams, B. A. O., [1976] ‘Persons, character, and morality’, in Moral Luck (Cambridge, 1981), 3–19. From The Identities
of Persons, ed. A. O. Rorty (Berkeley, 1976), 197–216.
—— [1980] ‘Justice as a virtue’, in EAE, 189–99.
Williams, C. J. F., [1965] ‘Form and sensation’, SPAS 39 (1965), 139–54.
—— [1982] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: De Generatione et Corruptione, Oxford, 1982.
—— [1985] ‘Aristotle's theory of descriptions’, PR 94 (1985), 63–80.
Williams, D. C., [1958] ‘Form and matter’, PR 67 (1958), 291–312, 469–521.
Wilpert, P., [1940] ‘Zum aristotelischen Wahrheitsbegriff ’, in Hager [1972], 106–21. From Philosophisches Jahrbuch 53
(1940), 3–16.
—— [1956] ‘Aristoteles und die Dialektik’, KS 48 (1956–7), 247–57.
Wilson, M. D., [1978] Descartes, London, 1978.
Wood, A. W., [1981] Karl Marx, London, 1981.
Wood, E. M., and Wood, N., [1978] Class Ideology and Ancient Political Theory, Oxford, 1978.
Woodﬁeld, A., [1976] Teleology, Cambridge, 1976.
Woods, M. J., [1965] ‘Identity and individuation’, in Analytical Philosophy (Second Series), ed. R. J. Butler (Oxford, 1965),
120–30.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

—— [1967] ‘Problems in Metaphysics vii 13’, in Moravcsik [1967], 215–38.
—— [1974] ‘Substance and essence in Aristotle’, PAS 75 (1974–5), 167–80.
—— [1982] (tr. and ed.) Aristotle: Eudemian Ethics i, ii, viii, Oxford, 1982.
Wright, L, [1973] ‘Functions’, PR 82 (1973), 139–68.
—— [1976] Teleological Explanations, Berkeley, 1976.
Zeller, E., [1897] Aristotle and the Earlier Peripatetics, ET, 2 vols., London, 1897.

659

This page intentionally left blank

Index Locorum
‘101’ = § 101, ‘4n1’ = Ch. 4 n. 1. The more important
references are indicated by an asterisk.

A. Aristotle
Categories (Catg.)
1a16 3n4
1a20–b9 27
1a24–5 29*
1a27 6n9
1a27–9 12n1
1b3–6 4n32, 10n17
1b6–7 3n19, 10n35
1b6–9 28
1b25–7 27*, 3n4
2a4–10 3n4, 4n21*
2a11–12 42*
2a11–19 28*
2a14–15 41*
2a19–34 3n27*
2a34–b6c 42*
2a36 3n19
2a36–b1 3n21*, 4n20*
2b1–3 40, 3n21*
2b3 3n19
2b5–6c 3n23
2b7–8, 15–17 28*
2b7–14 12n38*
2b7–14, 30–7 28*
2b15–22 10n17
2b15–22, 2b37–3a6 28
2b29–34 3n30
2b29–37 41*
2b30–7 32*
2b36–3a1 42–3*
2b37–3a6 10n17
3a21–8 33*, 3n29*
3a29–31 3n3
3a29–32 40*
3a35–b7 4n32
3a36 3n26*
3b10 4n12*
3b10–21 41*, 48*, 3n3, 3n19*, 3n30, 3n35
3b24–32 3n65
3b36 6n10
4a5–17 3n34
4a10–22 27*, 31*, 4n9
4a21–37 2
4a22 3n3

4b10–13 3n34
4b17–18 31
5a38–b10 32*
5b30–6a11 3n34
6a26–35 3n40
6a39 6n10
6b2ff 4n5*
6b2–6 38*
6b28–30 3n21
6b36–7a22 38*
7a25–b14 38*, 4n3*
7a31–b1 112
7b15–8a12 38
8a13, b23–4 3n3
8a13–28 40
8a15–21 38*, 3n26
8a23 40
8b3 3n19
8b3–6 3n19
8b3–21 4n2*
8b13–15 3n21
8b25–6 3n25, 3n31*
8b27 3n22
9a14, 28 3n22
9a14–27 40
9a33 40
10a11 3n22
10a11–16 40
10a27–9 3n25
10a27–b11 3n24*
10a30 3n25
10b12–17 3n25*
10b16, 27 6n9
11a7 6n9
11a20 3n3
11a20ff 4n5
11a20–38 38*
11a23 3n22
11a25, b26 6n10
13b37–14a1 2n63
14a6–10 41*

662
14a29–35 42*
14b4–5 6n18
14b10–23 2, 42*, 43*, 67*, 145*
14b33–15a7 3n46
15a18–20 3n3
De Interpretatione (DI)
16a9–18 168*, 3n4
17a2–4 14n4
17a39–40 41*, 3n21*, 3n22
18b9–25 11n6
20b15–19 39*
20b17, 34 3n46
21a3 3n46
21a8–14 39*, 4n7*
21a15, 17 3n46
21a20 6n9
Prior Analytics (APr)
ii 26 2n69
24a22–5 6n1
24b11 19
32b5–6 5n20
42a3–4 15
43a39, b8–9 6n1
46a3–10 6n1
46a17–27 12*, 2n15*, 2n17
46a20–1 13
46a28–30 7n10
46a29 2n8
46b22–5 2n50
49a6–10 3n8
53a2–3 2n17
62a11–19 2n42
64b28–38 72*
64b34–65a4 9n14
65a35–7 6n1
66b4–17 9n15
68b13–14 15
68b15–29 15, 2n22
68b27–9 7n3
68b35 1n1
68b35–7 15
70a3–4 2n42
Posterior Analytics (APo)
i 30 16n3
ii 19 12n51
71a5–9 15
71a9–11 2n21
71b9–16 63*
71b22–3 7n15*
71b29–33 66*
71b29–72a5 145*
71b31–3 67*
72a1 1n1
72a3 1n1
72a5–6 7n15
72a9–11 6n1
72a16–18 79

INDEX LOCORUM

72b5–18 68*, 70*
72b11–30 6n24*
72b13–15 6n23*
72b18–25 6n26
72b25–32 68*
72b27–30 15
72b36–73a6 69*
73a28–b28 5n20*
73a32–74a3 63*
73b26–32 63*
74b24–6 7n15
75a18, b1 6n13
75a42 7n22
76a13–15 7n15
76a16–17 7n15
76a16–25 7n19*
76a16–30 77*
76a26–32 7n15
76a38–b2 79*
76b9–11 7n22
76b13 6n13
76b23–4 72*
77a5–9 63, 6n4
77a23–35 79*, 2n47, 7n19*
77a36–40 7n15
77b3–6 72*
81a38–b9 2n21–2
81b18–23 2n18, 2n42, 6n1
82b35–6 2n46
83a1–9 64*
83a7 6n10
83a9–14 108*, 114*
83a21 10n12
83a22–5 63
83a30–5 63
83b17–31 4n19, 6n13
84a38 2n46
85b15–18 63, 141*, 4n14*
85b20 10n12
85b23–7 6n6, 6n13*
86a3–8 2n22
86a22 2n46
87b30–3 12n44
88a1–5 2n10, 2n22
88a14–19 7n3*, 2n46
88a30 2n46
88b1–3 3n8
88b3, 27–9 7n22
88b35–7 6n26
90a28–30 2n22
90a38–b1 2n17, 7n23
91a12 2n77, 7n23

INDEX LOCORUM

91b15–17 2n36, 9n14
92a34–b3 2n21
92a37–8 15
92a39 2n22
93a1–3 7n23
94a21 4n9
96b1–3 5n20
96b15–21 79*
97b7–39 15, 65*
98a13 3n10
99b12–19 74*
99b20–100a3 2n77
100a3–9 169
100a16–b1 169
100b3–17 74*, 6n26
Topics (Top.)
viii 5 195, 3n53
100a18–21 18
100a25–30 34
100a27–b23 6n1, 72*
100a29–30 19
100b21 2n42
101a26–b4 18*
101a27 7n14
101a27, 34 2n35*
101a34–b4 3, 12, 20, 26, 34*, 90*, 7n10*, 7n20*
102a18–24 32*, 41*, 3n38*
102b4–14 32*
102b6 4n22
103a14–23 28*, 41*, 3n20*, 12n27*
103b21–39 27, 28*, 3n7, 3n17*, 3n36*, 10n12
104a3–11, b22–4 2n43
104a3–8 20
104a8–12 2n42
104b1–5 20
104b12–17 20
104b22–4 20
104b36 3n10
105a3–9 19, 20, 3n53
105a10–19 15, 1n1, 2n22, 2n63
105b1 19
105b19–29 2n46
105b30–1 6n1
106a1–8 27
106a9–22 3n9
106a23–35 27
106b1–20 3n9
106b21–5 27
106b33–107a2 3n9, 3n24
107a3–12 27, 3n8*
107a18–21, b6–12 3n9
107b6–12 3n31
107b13–18 27
108a26–37 2n67
109a29 3n10
109b1–9 3n24
109b13–23 4n32

110a16 3n10
110b21–5 32
111a33–b4 3n24
112a7–11 2n67
112a32–8 2n68
113b6–14 3n43*
114a27–32 3n24
115b14–24, b24–9 2n69
118b27 21n3
121a30–9 2n69, 4n32
122b12–17 33
122b20–2 4n32
123b17, 27, 34 2n69
124b19, 32 2n69
125a1, 32 2n69
128a4–12 3n44
128a20–9 33
128a38–b6 2n68
128b6 2n69
128b34–6 32*, 3n38
130b38–131a26 3n39*
131b37–132a21 3n39*
132a34–b3 3n38
133a12–23 3n39*
134a5–17, a26–b10 3n42*
134a5–17, b5–7 3n47*
135a20–b6 4n33*
138b3–5 14n31
139a10–20 3n38
139a28–31 33
139b13–15 32
139b22–140a2 3n44
140a3 3n10
140a34, b5 28
140b27–141a2 10n40
141a24–37 22, 32*, 66*
141a31–b2 66, 6n10
141b3–34 66
141b4 1n1
141b15–21 32*
141b22–142a2 3n44
141b25 1n1
141b34–142a9 66
142a9–11 1
142b22–9 32, 33
143a29–b10 32
143a30 2n36
144a5–22 32
144a11–15 3n44
144a23–7 3n47
144b1–3 4n32
144b31–145a2 32
145a13–18 33*

663

664
145a37–b7 2n52
145b17–20 20*
146b3 28
146b13–19 2n69
148a37–b4 2n68
148b16–22 2n6, 3n10*
150a15–21 32
150b7–13, 15–19 2n69
150b22–6 32
151a1–13, 20–31 32
151a32–b2, b15–17 3n44
153a31–b8 2n69
153b4–12 2n69
155b7–16 1n15, 2n36, 6n1, 9n14
155b24–8 2n68
156a7 2n68, 9n15
156a27–b3 2n69
156b6–9 2n36
156b8–157a6 2n68, 9n15
156b10–17 15
156b20–3 2n68
157a25–33 15, 2n39
157a34–b2 2n69
157b3–8 15
157b14–23 2n69
158a7–13 9n14
158a31–b8 11, 2n30
158b1 2n37
158b2–4 72*
158b3–6 2n68
159a25–37 2n36, 8n56
159a37–b35 2n53
159b21 19
159b30 19, 3n53
160b17–22 23
160b33–9 2n69
161a1–15 2n69
161a24–9 2n36
161b34–8 2n42
162a12–18 2n37, 2n52, 6n1
162b31–163a28 6n1, 9n14
163b4–16 2n50, 7n14
164a8–15 2n38
165a38–b11 2n36, 2n42, 6n1
167a23–7 3n34
168a26 4n13
169a22–5 27
169a30–6 4n13
169b22–7 2n36, 8n56
170a33, 40, b7–11 2n42
170a34–b3 7n20*, 9n15
170b6–8 19*
170b11 2n36
170b19–25 27
171b1 2n36
171b3–12 2n40, 2n47, 7n20*, 8n56
171b28 2n10

INDEX LOCORUM

172a11–21 2n47, 7n19, 8n49
172a21–36 2n36, 8n56
173a19–30 23
173a25–7 19
175a5 7n14
178a7 10n12
178b36–9 2n49, 3n33, 4n13*, 12n2*
179a8–10 3n33
180a26–9 2n46
181b37–182a6 10n40
182b13–27 3n8*
183b1 2n36
Physics (Phys.)
184a10–21 1
184a16–26 22*, 145*
184a17–23 22, 1n1
184a23–6 169
184a26–b14 2n62*
184b25–185a5 35*, 3n51*
185a2–3 , 20 3n52*, 8n2
185a5–12 35*, 36*, 3n53
185a12–14 2n63, 3n54*, 6n27
185a12–20 22n1
185a20–6 27, 3n8
185a26–b25 3n57*
186b14–33 3n50
188a3 2n49
188a19–30 37*
188a31–b2 37*, 120*, 3n63
188a36–b8 37*
188b12 3n63
188b14 3n63
188b26–30 37, 85
188b32 1n1
189a5 1n1
189a16–17 2n27
189a20–34 37, 3n65*, 4n31
190a10–13 4n25
190a13–17 45, 4n25*
190a24–6 45*
190a31–b17 45*, 47*, 48*, 4n24*, 4n26*, 4n29*
190b9, b25 4n28
190b19–22, 28–9 5n8*
190b19–23 48*
190b24–7 3n28, 4n31, 10n35
191a1–3 45
191a7–12 48*, 4n28*, 10n19
191a8–12, 15–20 5n8
191a11–12 4n31*
191a12–13 48*
191a19–20 48*, 10n19*

INDEX LOCORUM

191a27–31 45*
191b27–9 3n64, 120
191b35–6 20n18
192a5 4n28
192a20–1 5n8
192a31–2 4n26*, 4n28
192a34–b2 5n8, 8n2, 22n1, 22n5
192b1–2 12n1
192b13–27 50*
192b16–32 53*
192b33–4 5n10, 22n7
193a3–9 23, 72*, 1n1
193a9–10, 20 5n10
193a10–12 53*, 4n26*
193a13–14 53*
193a14–21 53*
193a23–6 5n10
193a29–30 53*
193a30–1 54*
193a31–b18 53*, 3n64, 5n7*
193b1–2 54*
193b8–12 55
193b25–8 65
193b31–5 171*, 8n43
194a1–7, 12–17 130
194a15–b15 2n77
194a18–21 8n10
194a27–b13 8n10
194b2–7 54*
194b14 8n2
194b14–15 22n5
194b17–23 50*
194b25 51
194b27–8 5n4, 8n13
194b29–32 50*
195a5–8 50, 51, 5n2*
195a9, 30 51
195a11–14 50, 51, 15n35
195a18–19 5n4
195a22–3 50
195a30 51
195b21–8 51*, 5n5*
196a1–11 56*, 5n14
196a14–17 2n71
196a24–196b5 5n18
196b12–13 5n20
196b20–1, 29–30 56*
196b22 56*, 5n13*
196b24–36 56*, 5n12*, 5n13*, 5n15*
196b36–197a5 57*, 5n19*
197b1–8 179
198b10–27 55*, 5n11*, 5n13
198b23–32 55*, 57*, 5n17
198b32–199a8 57, 5n17*, 5n18*, 5n24*
199a8–32 5n26*
199b24–5 57
199b34–5 59*

200a8–13 59*, 5n34
200a30–b8 11n31, 14n20
200b26–8 2n64
200b27, 35 10n12
201b26 10n12
202a13 163
202a18–20, b11–16 13n21*
202a21–b5 2n48
202b30–203a4 2n54
203b20 5n20
204b4–10 2n48
207a8–10 192
207b8–10 3n24
208a32–b1 2n10, 2n44, 2n54, 2n64
208b33–209a2 4n18
209a29–30 2n55
210a18–21 13n33
210b8 2n63
210b32–4 22, 2n10, 2n44, 2n64
211a7–12 12, 23, 2n44, 2n74
211a19 2n64
213a19–22 22
213b21 2n27
217b29–32 2n54
217b32–3 2n55
218b9–219b2 2n64
220b22–8 2n75
224b1–10 9n27
224b4, 25–6 163
227b7, 30 4n32
228a6–9 21n1
228b11–15 192
229b2 2n63
231a18ff 2n45
233a7, b14 7n10
237a35 7n10
238a32, b16, 26 7n10
240b8 7n10
244b3 2n63
245b9–12 3n24
245b9–246a1 12n34
246a10–b2 160*, 14n4
246a13, 247a3 199*
246b12–16 12n1
251b1–5 11n9
252a24–5 2n21
252a32–b6 6n27
253a32–b6 2n69
253b29 2n44, 2n70
254a6, 17 2n44
254a8 2n70
254a27 9n15

665

666
254b30–3 13n37
260b17–19 4n18
261a13–14 6n18
262a18 2n49
262a19 2n9
263a15–18 14
264a7, b2 2n48, 7n15
265a22–4 6n18
265b17–19 2n74
De Caelo (DC)
268a1–11 3n41
268a21–2 18n15
270b4–20 2n11, 2n16, 2n28
270b13–17 2n29
270b17–21 2n43
271a30–3 14n1
275b12 2n48, 2n49
277b32–3 12n45*
278a8–10 135*, 12n9, 12n45
278b3–8 12n45*
279a30–3 2n45, 2n27
279b3–12 16n18
280a33–4 2n48, 2n49
281b20–5 5n20
284a12–13 2n28
286a3–7 2n16
286b18–23 18n15
287b15–18 2n9, 2n11
287b28–288a12 11, 2n10*, 2n29
290a8–24 2n13, 2n16
290a27–35 14n1
291b11–15 14n1
291b24–292a18 2n10, 2n19, 2n29, 2n58, 7n14
292a10–23 2n16, 2n19, 2n20, 2n29
293a23–30 2n9, 2n29, 2n24
294b6–13 14, 2n54, 2n69, 7n15
297a2–6 2n10, 2n24, 2n45
297b22 2n10
298b3 3n41
298b11–20 3n54
300b21 16n23
303a5–10 12n30
303a20–4 2n11, 2n29, 2n45
306a3–18 13, 16*, 2n11, 2n13, 2n24, 2n25, 2n49, 12n1
306a6–17, 26–30 2n29
309a21–7 16
De Generatione et Corruptione (GC)
ii 11 5n32*
314a18–20 4n33
314b2–16 2n13
315a3–4 16, 2n14, 2n70
315a33–b6 2n15, 2n49
315a34, b18 16n23
315b9–15 2n13
315b15–16 2n14
316a5–14 11, 16, 2n10, 2n14, 2n17, 2n30, 2n48, 2n49
316b2–5 5n8

INDEX LOCORUM

317a20–2 4n27*
317b9, 21, 27, 31 10n12
318a5–6 8n2
318a15 10n12
318b1 10n12
318b21–33 2n13, 10n35
319a12 10n12
319b14–18 4n27*, 5n8
320b2–4 2n13
321b16–34 137*, 4n33, 5n9*, 11n29, 12n24*
322a2 5n8*
322a10–16 5n9
322a28–33 202*, 5n9*
323b30 2n9
324a14–15 20n18
325a13–23 2n29, 2n49, 6n27
325a16–23, 26, 28 2n70
325a17–29 23, 2n9, 2n10, 2n13, 2n17, 2n24
325a32–6 12n30
325b15 2n10
327a15–20 2n13
328a10–12 2n13, 4n33
328a27–8 12n1
328b9 8n15
331a1–3 3n65
331a7–10 2n24
332a3–18 4n30
334a15–25, b2–7 4n30
335a3–6 3n65
335b5–7 5n9
335b9–17 8n16
335b24–7 2n48, 2n49
335b33–336a12 8n12, 8n13
336b15–19 2n24
337b35–338a3 5n20
338b11–19 5n25, 12n1
Meteorologica (Metr.)
338a26–339a4 2n19
340a19–33 2n19
341a29–32 2n28
342b25–7 14
344a5–9 2n24, 2n29
346a6–8 2n10
346a27–31 2n17

INDEX LOCORUM

349a14–16 2n15
350a15–18 2n16
350b19–20 2n27
352a17–20 2n15
353b17–18 2n15
354b19–24 2n19
355a33–b4 2n19
355b21–33 2n19
357b15–23 16
357b26–32 2n19
358a30–b11 2n19
359a17–21 2n27
360a34 2n27
362a12–31 2n19
365a34–7 2n27
389b23–8 4n33
389b28–390a19 11n29
De Anima (DA)
402a3–10 1n2
402a4–7 150*, 154*, 254*, 2n8
402a9–10 13n2, 14n17
402a24 10n12
402b1–9 150*
402b5–8 13n3*
402b16–403a3 32, 2n49, 13n1
403a3–25 14n17
403a21 14n21
403a24–b19 157*
403a25 13n44*
403b15–16 22n5
403b18 13n2
403b20–4 2n51
403b21–2 2n50
403b24–5 2n44
404a27–31 2n13
405a5–7, b12 13n8
405b11–12 150*, 13n4*
406a6 13n37
406b15–22 13n6*
407b13–26 150*, 155*, 13n11
407b23–408a5 13n12*
407b27–408a28 150*
408a11–24 2n76
408a24–6 12n1
408b1–18 13n22*, 13n29
408b8 14n21
409a9–10 13n7
409b20–1 13n8
409b26–9 13n6*, 14n12
410b10–15 150*
410b18–21 14n2
410b22–4 13n7
411a24–b30 153*
411b5–14 155*
411b5–30 150*
411b22–4 14n2
411b25–7 13n9*

411b27–8 13n7
412a3–6 22, 26
412a3–13 22n7
412a6–10 113, 135*, 139*, 12n1, 12n10, 12n26
412a6–21 151*
412a15–21 152*, 13n14*, 13n20*
412a19–22 126*
412a22–8 127*, 152*
412a28–b1 152*
412b1–3 14n2
412b4–9 127*, 152*, 13n17*
412b11 132*
412b17–25 16n37
412b20 4n2
412b20–6 131*, 152*, 13n16*
412b25–7 126*, 152*
413a3–7, b24–9 12n1
413a4 14n19
413a8–9 13n37*
413a11–16 1n1, 2n61
413b2–4 14n2
413b14 13n2, 14n19
413b16 2n56
413b22–4 159*
414a12–14 151*
414a14–19 151*
414a31 14n19
414a32–b7 159*
414b1–6 174*, 15n1
414b1–16 133*
414b20–33 158*, 13n45*
415a6–7 133*, 14n2
415a7–11 177*, 180
415a25–b7 5n25, 14n2
415b16–17 14n1
415b28–416a18 58*, 137*, 151*
416a3–5 14n2
416a9–18 5n9
416b23–5 14n2
417a14–17 160*, 161*
417a20 14n20
417a21 2n56
417a21–9 127*, 160
417a21–b2 124, 152, 160
417a30–b12 124*, 125*, 160*, 11n13
417b9–16 125*, 160*
417b19–26 12n51, 14n44*
417b31–2 124*
418a3 161*, 14n20
418a3, 31 14n24
418a5–6 161*, 14n19

667

668
418a11–16 14n32
418a20–2 14n37
418a21–3 14n24
418b20–6 2n70
419a1–15 162, 14n29, 14n33
419a8, 19 14n24
419b4–11 14n29
420a3–7 14n20
420a7–9 14n29
420a9–11 14n2
420b16–22 14n2
420b26 14n21
420b32 18n18
421a9–13 14n2
421a26 14n24
421b21–3 14n2
422a6–7, a34–b5 14n20
422a7, b15–16 161*, 14n19
422a10, 16, b15 14n24
422b1–7, 23 14n18
423a7, 13–17, b30 14n20
423a17–21 14n18
423b1–26 14n21
423b27–424a2 161*, 14n18, 14n19, 14n20, 14n24
424a2–5 161*, 14n20
424a7, 18, b2 14n20
424a17–19 14n19
424a18–24 161*, 14n24
424a24–5 14n19
424a32–b3 161*
424b2–3 162*
424b12–18 161*, 162*
425a14–30 166*, 14n24, 14n38*, 14n37
425a30–b4 14n39
425b20–2 14n24, 14n40*
425b22–4 161*, 14n19, 14n20
425b26–426a6 163*, 14n29*
426a8–19 14n29
426a20–6 164*, 14n30
426b9 14n19
426b12–24 166*
426b17–427a14 166*, 14n39
427b2–3 2n13
427b8–16 165*, 14n32
427b16–26 168*
428a9–11 14n3
428a11–12, a16–19 171*
428a12–15 14n41
428a19–24 168*, 170*, 14n42
428b17–30 171*, 14n32, 14n37*
428b24–5 2n13
429a15 14n20
429a15–27 13n36, 14n45*
429a31–2 169*
429b10–18 169*
430a22–3 13n36
430a24–5 12n1

INDEX LOCORUM

430a26–8 14n46
430b29–30 14n32
431a4–7 160*
431a8–17 173*, 174*, 14n50
431a19 14n21
431b20–432a3 161*, 14n12, 14n44*
432a3–10 169
432a10–12 168, 170*, 3n4
432a12–14 169*
432a15–18 173*, 15n1, 14n19
432a20–b2 15n2*
432b5–8 173*, 174, 15n22
432b19–26 14n1, 14n2, 15n1*
432b31 14n21
433a1–26 15n4*
433a21–6 174*, 176*, 15n7*
433a26–7 15n8*
433a27–30 174*
433a31–b4 175*
433b5–13 174*, 175*, 178, 15n20*
433b19–21 14n17
433b31–434a7 14n3
434a5–11 177*, 191*
434a16–21 15n16
434a30–b8 14n1, 14n2
434a30–b8, b9–29 14n2
434b9–435a10 163*
435a20–4 14n20
435a24–b3 14n20
435b19–25 14n2
Parva Naturalia (PN)
436a6–10, b1–8 14n17
436b12–437a3 14n2
438a34–b1 2n8
438b12 2n10
438b30–439a5 14n21
439a13–16 163*
439a27–9 2n10
442b4–10 2n13, 14n32
446a7–10, a28–b2 2n28
446a7–20 2n13
448b12–15 2n13
459b6–8 14n21
459b25 16n23
460a26–8 2n27
460b20–7 2n13
462b12–22 2n11
464b19–465a2 2n19
465a27–30 12n1
467b13–468a1 14n21
468a20–5 2n9, 2n28, 14n21
469a2–b1 2n9, 2n28, 14n1, 14n21

INDEX LOCORUM

470b6–12 2n10, 2n15
479a7–9, 22 12n1
Historia Animalium (HA)
487b7–11 14n2
488a7–10 18n17*
488b24–5 18n17
491a9–14 2n8, 2n15
491b21 14n20
588b10–30 14n2, 18n18
588b30–589a2 18n17
608a17–21 18n18
621b2–5 14n2
De Partibus Animalium (PA)
639a4–15 11*, 2n3, 2n14, 8n17*
639b8–16 55*, 8n10
640a10–b4 54*, 55*, 2n14, 8n10
640b4–29 8n10
641a14–17 8n10
641a25 54*
641a36 8n2
641b12–15 14n1
642a13–31 37, 85, 2n10, 8n10, 8n13
642a32–b4 59*, 14n17
643b9–26 15
644a27–8 12n44
644a29–32 16n13
644b1–8 15, 3n10
644b22–645a4 2n29, 2n31, 7n14
646a8–12 12, 2n8
646a25–b2 2n63, 4n18, 6n18
646b7–10 18n15
653b24 14n20
658a8–10 658b2–10 5n34 14n1
660a35–b2 18n18
661b3–5 14n1
663b12–664a8 5n34*
666a22–4 2n27
667b6–10 2n28
679a25–30 5n34
681b31–682a1 14n2
691b1–4 14n1
694a13–15 14n1
695b17–19 14n1
De Motu Animalium (MA)
701a32–3 15n16
703a29–b2 13n33
De Generatione Animalium (GA)
715b7–16 2n28
716a2–4 2n30
719a9–11 2n8
721b28–9 2n27
725b4–7 2n27, 2n28
726b22–4 11n29
727a31–3 2n27
727b29–30 5n20
728a25–31 2n28
729a9–14 137*, 2n28

729a31–2 2n10
729b22–3 2n24
731a24–39 2n28
731b31–732a1 137*, 5n25, 12n1
733b24–6 2n19
734b24–7 11n29
735a4–26 11n18*
735a30–1 2n19
736a24–7 2n19
736b5–8 2n19
736b21–4 12n1
739b19–20 14n1
740a23–4 2n8
740b3–5 2n19
741a10–11 11n29
741a14–16 2n8
741a19–20 2n19
741b2–6 14n1
742a16–18 2n15
742a17–19 2n10
742a22 4n18
742a30–2 163
742b30–4 7n2, 8n52
744a36–b1 14n1
745a4–9 18n15
745a19–27 2n19
747a26–30 2n15, 2n29
747b27–30 7n15
747b27–748a17 2n48, 2n49
748a7–11 16, 7n15
748a13–17 2n15
750a21–3 2n10
750b31–3 2n8
751a8–11 2n8
752a24–5 2n19
753a27–30 2n28
754b20–1 2n19
755b22–3 14
756a3–6 2n24
756b23–4 2n10
757a14–17 2n19
757b34–758a7 2n8, 2n15, 2n24
759a8–12 2n19
759a25–7 2n24
759b28 2n10
760a33–5 18n15
760a35–b1 5n25

669

670
760b6 2n10
760b17–22 2n28
760b28–33 16, 2n10, 2n24, 2n31
761a14–19 2n28
763a3–7 2n28
763b15–16 2n8
765a25–9 2n24
767b28–35 16, 137*, 11n22, 12n21*
768a1–2, b13–15 137*
770b27–35 14, 2n19
771a13 13n33
771b8–10 2n27
771b15–19 14
773a8–13 13n33
776a3–6 18n15
776a9–10 16, 2n19
777a19–21 5n20
777b26–30 18n15
778b2–11 2n14
778b23–5 2n19
788b20–7 2n14, 14n1
De Plantis
815a18 13n7
Problems (Probl.)
902b23–7 8n15
Metaphysics (Met.)
980b21–7 14n3
981a5–7 169
982a1–3 1n2
982a4–23 83*
982b25–6 220*
983a24–b6 84*, 8n12
983b6–18 85*, 110
983b7, 10, 16 8n12
983b10 85
984a18–19 85
984a29–b1 8n11
984b5–8 8n11
984b8–22 85, 8n11, 8n16
985a4–b4 8n11
985a5 86
985a10–23 86*, 8n16
985a18–29 8n11
985b10 8n12
985b19–20 8n11
986a1–2 91, 8n3
986a6–8 2n30
986b8 8n12
986b27–33 37, 85, 2n10
987a19–22 85, 8n12
987b21 8n12
987b29–33 2n37, 2n49, 8n16
988b8–16 85*
988a23 86
988a34–b6 85, 8n9, 8n12
989b5 8n15
989b19–21 8n9

INDEX LOCORUM

990a33–b4 3n12, 8n16
991a8–11 8n16
991a8–b1 2n76
991a13, b1 8n12
991b3–8 8n16
992a24–b1, b7–9 11, 8n16
992b18–24 91, 3n8, 8n3*
992b31–3 2n21
993a13 86
993a15 86
993a17–24 8n9, 8n12
993a26–7 2n50
993b7–11 1n1, 2n61
995a12–16 11
995a24–7 87*, 2n54
995a27–b4 20*
995b2–4 189, 16n18
995b4–27 87*
995b13–18 8n21
995b22–4 88*, 94*, 225*, 2n42
995b27–996a15 87*
995b35 10n26
996a18–b1 88*
996a20–1 8n23*
996a21–b1 8n23*
996b1–26 8n23*
996b26–997a15 88*, 97*, 8n26*
997a2–12 88*, 8n26*, 8n29, 8n53
997a11–15 88*, 8n53
997a17–21 8n24*
997a30–2 88*
997a33–998a19 8n21
997b32–998a6 8n6*
997b34–998a19 8n29*
998a20–b14 89, 8n27*, 12n41
998b4–8 89, 8n27*
998b14–19 111
999b5–16 11n22
999a14–22 89, 8n29
999a24–b24 89*, 8n29*
999b24–1000a4 80, 8n29
1000b20–1001a3 89, 8n28*
1001a4–b25 8n29
1001b26–1002a8 112, 3n15
1001b29–32 28
1002a30 12n1
1003a5–17 8n29*
1003a14–15 63
1003a21–32 91*, 107, 8n3*, 8n39*, 8n44

INDEX LOCORUM

1003a33–4 8n45
1003a33–b10 8n4
1003b6–10 92, 8n45
1003b15–19 92*, 8n4
1003b29–30 117, 132
1004a4 8n49*
1004a22–6 8n4, 8n51
1004a31–b4 92*, 2n77
1004a34–b26 8n49
1004b1–5 88*, 8n48*
1004b5–17 91*, 92*, 95*, 107, 3n40, 8n49
1004b17–26 94*, 7n20, 8n55*, 8n56, 8n60*
1005a5–11 8n51
1005a19–22 7n20
1005a19–b8 91*, 93*, 97*, 107, 7n19*, 8n42, 8n49*, 9n4
1005b2–5 11, 97, 8n54*
1005b14 8n62*
1005b17 8n62*
1005b20–2 2n46
1005b26–34 9n1
1006a5–11 11, 97*, 105*
1006a11–15 97*, 100*, 9n4
1006a12–b11 9n3
1006a15–18 100*
1006a18–25 98*
1006a32–4 98*
1006a34–b11 9n6*
1006b5–9 100*
1006b13–15 98*
1006b22–5 98*
1006b33–4 9n4
1007a21–b10 99*, 110, 9n10*
1007b5–16 99*
1007b17–19 9n1
1007b20–3 9n20
1008b3–5 102*
1008b10–12 97
1009a3–5 9n1
1009a6–1010a9 2n13
1009a6–15 102*, 9n20
1009a20–2 3n53
1009a33–b12 102*, 9n20*
1009b2–6 104*
1010a1–15 9n23
1010a7–9 102*
1010a15–22 9n27, 9n28
1010a23–5 103*
1010b3–11 105*
1010b14–25 14n32
1010b30–1011a2 2, 103, 14n31*
1011a3–16 11, 104*, 105*, 7n2
1011a17–20 2, 104*
1011a21–b12 104*, 9n33*
1011b13–14 9n1
1012a17–20 23
1013a5 13n33
1013a14–15 1

671

1014a22 12n2
1015a22–6 18n25
1015b36–1016a9 12n28
1016b11–17 192*
1017a7–22 6n11
1017a25 10n12
1017b10–26 28*, 10n15*, 10n17, 10n19, 12n3
1017b33–4 10n47
1018b30–7 6n20
1019a2 4n18
1020a15 3n41
1020a33–b25 3n32*, 12n52
1021a28 6n10
1021b12–23 192
1022a25–9 12n1
1023b26–34 192
1024a6–8 192
1024a23–8 13n33
1024b8–9 11n38
1025a15 5n20
1025a30–4 32*, 6n13
1025b3–16 91*, 93*, 8n44
1025b30–1026a6 130, 10n40
1026a2–3 11n39*
1026a10–32 8n42*
1026a33–b2 8n4
1026b4–14 2n75
1026b22–4 12n1
1026b27–37 5n20
1027a29–32 12n1
1027b18–28 66*
1027b28–1028a4 8n4
1028a11–12 109*
1028a11–31 114*
1028a12, 25–7 134*
1028a15–18 107*
1028a18–b2 107*, 108*, 109*, 110*, 114*, 139*, 10n5, 10n8, 12n2,
12n12
1028b2–4 107*, 10n1*
1028b8–15 3n15
1028b27–32 110*, 10n23
1028b33–6 109*, 119*, 138*, 10n14, 12n41
1028b36–1029a9 110
1029a1 10n24*
1029a1–2 113*, 10n18*
1029a2–7 113*, 138*
1029a5–7, 30–3 133*

672
1029a7–8 10n23, 10n24*
1029a9–12 112*, 115*, 10n23
1029a10, 26–7 10n24*
1029a12–16 112*
1029a18–19 112*, 10n24
1029a20–6 112*, 115*, 10n26
1029a26–30 113*, 138*, 10n24*, 12n2
1029a30–3 49*, 113*, 133*, 10n24, 10n31, 12n26
1029a33–4 119, 130
1029b1–3 113*
1029b3–12 114*, 1n1, 1n2, 2n6, 10n31*
1029b13 83*, 114*, 2n46, 10n32
1029b14–15 10n47, 12n1, 12n36
1029b22–7 114*, 12n1
1030a2–6 114*
1030a3–7, 19 117
1030a3–14 115*, 117, 141*
1030a10–14 115*, 118*, 10n46, 11n38
1030a19, 23 117
1030a21–7 10n32
1030a27–32 83*, 114*, 147*
1030a33 10n32
1030b4 10n32
1030b16–26 10n40, 11n37
1030b28ff 10n40
1031a1–14 10n40*
1031a17–18 117*, 140*
1031a24–8 10n45*
1031b4–19 10n44*
1031b6–7, 20–2 118*
1031b13–14 117
1031b28–1032a4 118*
1032a4–10 117*, 10n41*, 10n47, 12n1, 12n36
1032a10–11 10n23
1032a18–19 12n1
1032b1, 11–14 13n13
1032b1–2 130, 11n22*
1032b11–12 11n22*
1032b14 12n49*
1033a2 12n31
1033a4–5 13n44
1033a16–22 12n34
1033a31–2 134
1033a31–b16 11n22*
1033b17 12n1
1033b23–4 134, 10n34
1034a4 12n1
1034a5–8 136*, 12n13*
1034a6 12n31
1034b24–1035a9 129*, 13n32
1035a1–12 113, 129*, 133*, 139*, 10n22, 11n24*, 12n26
1035a7–9, b14–24, 27–31 12n1
1035a17–23 131*, 132*, 11n35*
1035a31–b1 131*, 152*
1035b1–3 134, 10n23
1035b14–25 131, 133*, 4n2, 11n39, 12n33
1035b25–7 155*

INDEX LOCORUM

1035b27–31 132, 134*, 11n25*, 12n5*, 12n35
1035b31–1036a8 134*, 12n6*
1036a2–9 134, 141*, 142*
1036a16–25 12n1, 12n7
1036a30–b7 130*, 11n31
1036b22–30 130*, 131, 155*, 11n26*, 11n39*, 11n41, 12n7*
1036b28–32 131*, 133*, 135*, 11n39, 12n33
1037a1–3 134*, 12n4*
1037a5–10 132*, 134*, 137*, 12n1, 12n7*
1037a5–10, 27–33 12n1
1037a12 8n4
1037a21 10n23
1037a27–30 139*, 144*
1037a30–3 131, 134
1037a33–b7 132*
1037b5–7 11n37*, 13n21
1037b21–7 11n38*
1038a5–8 11n38
1038b1–6 113, 120*, 121, 134*, 138*, 10n22, 10n23, 12n26, 12n33*
1038b8–9 140*
1038b9–15 140*
1038b10 12n36*
1038b11–12 143*, 12n35*, 12n40, 12n44*
1038b12–15 10n24, 12n26*
1038b15–16 140*
1038b16–22 12n39*
1038b34–1039a3 140*, 12n40*
1039a1–2 12n2
1039a3–14 12n30, 12n32
1039a14–23 12n32*
1039a33–b2 12n51
1039b20–31 134, 135*, 144*, 12n1, 12n9*, 12n36
1039b27–1040a7 141*
1040a4–5 12n51
1040a27–b2 141*, 12n14
1040b2 134

INDEX LOCORUM

1040b5–16 138*, 148*, 192*, 4n2, 10n22, 12n1
1040b17 117*, 12n36
1040b23–7 134, 143*, 12n37*, 12n44*
1040b26–30 8n32, 12n41
1041a3–5 10n23, 12n32*
1041a6–7 22
1041a9–10 128*
1041a28 114, 2n46, 10n31*
1041a31–2 11n21*
1041b4–9 128*, 12n31
1041b11–28 155*, 10n36
1041b28–31 12n1, 12n8
1042a12–16 109*
1042a17–21 111*
1042a22 8n4
1042a24–6 130
1042a25–31 111, 113, 134*, 135*, 139*, 151*, 10n24, 12n3
1042a26–b11 12n26
1042a27–8 138*, 10n20, 10n22*, 12n3, 12n12*, 12n26, 12n31
1042a32–b8 12n11*
1042b9–11 121*
1042b11–1043a7 12n30*
1042b11–15 121
1042b25–31 121
1043a2–7 121*, 12n1
1043a29–b4 130, 132*, 135*, 11n33, 12n1, 12n7
1043b15 12n1
1043b19–23 12n1, 12n8
1043b28–32 11n38
1043b35–1044a1 138*
1044b1–3 122*, 131*, 139*, 5n5, 10n27
1044b21–6 12n1
1044b29–34 122*
1044b34–1045a6 122*
1045a33–5 11n38
1045b17–23 127*, 132*, 152*
1045b32–1046a6 127*, 8n4*
1046a36–b13 15n28*
1046b4–15 125*
1046b36–1047a4 123*
1047a4–8 103*, 123*, 14n31*
1047a10–17 11n11
1047a20–8 11n11*
1047b3–6 11n11*
1047b31–1048a11 123*, 15n28*
1048a13–24 123*, 11n9*
1048a35–b4 2n63
1048b6–9 127*
1048b18–34 11n19*
1048b37–1049a3 126*
1049a5–12 126*, 11n9*
1049a13–18 126*, 11n9, 11n17*, 13n19
1049a18–24 139*, 10n36*
1049a24–b2 113*, 132*, 139*, 10n26, 10n27 10n30*, 12n1, 12n3,
12n26
1050a5–16 11n14*
1050a15 128*

1050a29 163
1050b34–6 2n49
1051a34–b9 66*
1051b6–9 2
1052a22–5 138*
1053b16 8n4
1054b32–1055a2 2n63
1055a5–6 2n63
1055b17 2n63
1056a12–14 2n9
1058b8–12 136*, 2n63
1058a23–4 11n38
1058a29–b12 12n17*
1059a6–7 12n1
1059a32–4 8n25*
1059a38–b21 8n21
1059b24–7 63
1060a3–4 8n21
1060a21–3 12n1
1061a28–b7 8n43*
1061b6, 28–30 8n44
1061b6–10 8n57*
1061b11–17 2n77
1062a2–11, 30–5 9n15*
1063a21 9n27
1063a27 9n26*
1063b30–5 2n76
1064a8–10 8n52
1064a28–b14 8n42*
1069a25–6 2n74
1069a27–8 2n49
1070a1–4 11n22, 12n1
1070a9–17 12n3, 12n20*
1070a21–6 12n1
1071a1–3, 20–9 12n1
1071a19–26 137*, 11n22, 12n1, 12n20*
1071a27–9 91, 137*, 12n1
1073b36–7 2n27
1074a1 2n27
1074a14–17 2n28
1075a19–23 226*
1075a38–b8 8n11
1075b35 21n1
1075b37–1076a4 2n10
1076a8–10 8n4

673

674
1076b39–1077a20 2n76
1077b2–3 4n18
1077b17–1078a31 8n43
1078a14–21 171*
1078b25–7 2n37
1084b23–5 2n49
1085a3–9 2n76
1085a26–b7 2n76
1085b34–1086a18 2n76
1087a19–20 21n1
1087b1–3 2n28
1087b18–21 2n46
1088a21–9 4n6*
1088b23–5 5n20
1090a9–11 2n46
1090b19–20 2n10
1091a6 2n70
1091a19 2n38
1093b25–9 2n30
Nicomachean Ethics (EN)
ix 3 2n77
ix 4 242*
1094a1–2 16n25
1094a2–3 16n25
1094a18–19 191*
1094a19–b7 16n22*
1094a24–7 191*
1094a26–b11 184*, 215*, 235*, 20n1
1094b6–11 187*
1094b14–16 184*
1094b19–27 16n3*
1094b19–1095a2 22n2
1094b22–1095a2 11, 2n3
1095a2–11 1, 184*
1095a14–28 191, 192, 196*, 218*
1095a20–2 184*
1095a28–30 184*, 2n38*, 2n43
1095a30–b4 11, 184*, 1n1, 1n2, 2n61
1095b4–8 184*
1095b19–22 246*, 19n16
1095b19–1096a2 196*
1096a1–2 240*, 2n70
1096a10–11, a34–b3 2n76
1096a21–2 4n6*, 4n18
1096a23–9 3n8
1097a8–13 2n76
1097a15–25 22, 115*, 192*, 16n25, 16n30
1097a15–b21 191*
1097a25–b6 192*, 16n20, 16n30*
1097a34, b15–16 196*
1097a34–b6 192*, 16n30
1097b8–15 187*, 193*, 208*, 215*
1097b16–20 16n36*
1097b22–1098a7 119*, 189*, 196*, 16n12, 16n37*, 22n1
1098a3–8 194*, 200*, 16n39*, 17n4
1098a8–12 2n44
1098a16–20 180*, 194*, 240*, 16n30*

INDEX LOCORUM

1098a20–2 254*, 10n24
1098b3–8 254*, 1n1
1098b12–16 16n41*
1098b27–9 2n71
1099a24 21n3
1099b32–1100a1 180*, 15n27
1100a5–9 240*
1100b11–17 202*, 207*
1100b28–1101a11 196*, 221*, 240*
1101a11–17 17n21*
1101b12–18 15n30*
1101b35–1102a4 16n23*
1102a2–3 191*
1102a7–13 185*, 19n27
1102a18–23 22n1
1102a32–b12 17n4
1102b13–1103a3 200*, 17n14
1103a14–18 207*
1103a23–6 199*, 200*, 207*
1103a26–b2 123
1103b2–6 2n74, 19n27
1103b23–5 184
1103b31–4 207*
1103b34–1104a11 16n3
1104a11–27 207*
1104b3–11 182*, 204*
1104b24 2n75
1104b31 21n3*
1105a28–33 181*, 200*, 202*, 240*
1105b5–12 11n12
1105b28–1106a10 15n30
1106a6–11 200*
1106a14–24 194*, 199*, 207*
1106b5–16 207*
1106b36–1107a2 200*, 228*, 237*
1107b1–2 17n23
1107b30–1108a1 17n23
1108a16–19 17n23
1109b1–12 189, 200
1109b34–5 19n27
1110a2 182*
1110a11–19 182*, 220*
1110b11–13 182, 15n33*
1110b18–24 182*
1111a19–24 182*, 15n32*
1111a24–6 181*

INDEX LOCORUM

1111b11–13 179*
1111b13–15 15n22
1111b16–18 15n22
1111b28–30 179
1112b17–20 15n18
1112b24–8 15n18
1113a9–12 179*, 15n22*
1113a33–b2 189*
1113b20–1 182*
1113b21–6 2n74, 19n27
1115a23–4 21n5
1115b7–10 220*
1115b10–20 200*, 237*
1116a11 237*
1116a16–29 238*
1116a29–b3 220*
1117a17–22 237*, 238*, 240*
1117b7–15 237*, 240*
1118a25–6 19n16
1118b1–4 238*
1118b20–1 19n16
1119a5–11 206*
1119a11–20 238*
1120a9–13 237*, 21n4*
1120a9–b4 239*
1120a23–9 21n4
1120b4–20 251*, 18n11
1121a1, b4–5 21n4
1121a30–b10 204*, 205*, 246, 21n6
1121b21–31 220*, 222*, 21n12
1122b6–7 185*, 237*, 239*
1122b21–3 237*, 239*
1123a4–5 237*
1123a20–7 21n8
1123b22–4 19
1124a4–12 239*
1124a29–b2 245*
1124b6–9 239*
1124b24–6 239*
1124b31–1125a2 220*, 222*, 226*
1125b8–18 189*
1125b12 21n22
1125b17–29 207*, 17n23
1126a3–8 200*, 239*, 19n16
1126a16–22 239*
1126b11–28 214*
1126b28–1127a6 239*
1127a8–10 205*
1127a11–17 17n23
1127a33–b3 239*
1127b3–7 239*
1128a20–2 19n16
1128a33–b1 239*
1129a26–31 3n10
1129a31–b1 228*
1129b1–4 231*
1129b11–29 185, 215*, 228*, 20n1*

1130a3–5 185*
1130a7–13 228*, 237*, 13n21
1130a14–24, b6–16 228*
1130b30–1131a4 20n11*
1131a24–9 230*, 20n7
1131b32–1132a6 231*
1132a19–24 189*
1132a24–b9 231*
1132b21–5 20n11*
1132b33–4 20n11
1133a5–27 20n11
1133a25–7 231*
1133b30–1134a13 229*
1134a35–b1 189
1136a23–b14 23
1138b25–34 184, 2n61
1139a15–17 199*
1139a31–b4 176*, 5n16, 15n4, 16n25
1139b3–4 5n16
1139b26–8 15
1140a25–31 179*, 200*, 228*
1140b31–1141a8 7n2
1141b23–33 13n21, 20n1
1142b18–20 15n22
1142b31–3 179*, 15n24, 17n6
1143a35–b5 7n2, 9n36*
1144a13–20 200*, 225*, 11n12
1144b14–17 228*
1144b21–5 200*
1144b32–1145a2 23, 228*, 237*
1145b1–7 12*, 19, 20, 23, 154*, 184*, 2n44, 2n51, 2n74
1145b27–31 21, 23, 184*, 2n70
1146a9–16 17n4
1146a21–7 23, 3n53
1146b6–8 20, 184, 2n51
1146b22–4 17n14, 17n18*
1147a24 2n46
1147a25–31 15n16
1147b4–5 169*
1150b29–1151a10 17n14
1152a4–6 17n14
1152a30–3 202*
1153a23–7 2n75
1153b19–21 240*
1154a22–6 23, 236*
1154b7–9 2n74
1155b17–18 2n64
1155b18–21 3n3*
1155b31–4 209*, 210, 18n2*
1156a3–5 18n2*
1156a10–16 209, 17n8, 18n2*

675

676
1156a16–19 201*, 209*, 17n8
1156b7–12 201*, 202*, 209*, 17n8, 18n2
1156b33–1157a3 19n10
1157a25–33 19n10
1159a5–11 17n9
1159a12–33 196
1159a28–33 214*
1159b7–10 21n6
1160a8–23 187*, 215, 20n11*
1160a9–30 215*
1160a21–3 180*
1161b26–1162a1 18n11
1161b27–9 214*
1162a19–24 180, 215, 18n20
1162b21–1163a1 237*, 18n28*
1163b1–3 20n12*
1164a8–13 202*
1164b22–1165a4 202*, 16n3
1165b20–31 202*, 17n118
1166a1–b2 209*
1166a2–6 214*
1166a10–13 203*
1166a14–b13 203*
1166a16–17 201*
1166a19–22 17n9*
1166b11–18 205*, 17n13*, 21n6
1166b26–9 203*, 16n8
1167a7–10 214*
1167a10–14 210*, 18n2*
1167b2–4 244*
1167b4–9 210*
1167b9–16 244*, 21n6
1167b17–30 212*, 2n46
1167b33–1168a9 18n11
1168a5–8 195*, 221*, 2n46, 16n45*
1168a9–12 237*
1168a24–6 18n11
1168b12 2n75
1168b15–23 218*, 229*, 231*, 238*
1169a3–7 201*, 237*, 238*, 21n3*
1169a8–11 237*
1169b3–10 208*, 211*
1169b16–19 215*
1169b23 2n75
1169b28–1170a4 18n6
1170a4–13 211*
1170a13–14 212*, 2n46, 18n6*
1170b5–14 210*, 211*, 215*
1170b14–19 208*, 211*, 217*
1170b31–3 18n15
1171a19–20 214*
1171a25–6 237*
1171b16 237*
1171b29–1172a8 211*
1172a8–10 21n6
1172b35–23* , 184* 1173a2 2n71
1174a1–4 196*

INDEX LOCORUM

1174a13–14 22, 2n64
1174b5 9n27
1176b27–1177a6 220*
1177a6–9 17n18*
1177b12–15 19n27
1179a3–13, 29 21n4
1179b4–31 16n8
1179b23–9 184
1180a4–5, 10–12 237*
1180a14–32 223*
1180a23–32 223, 19n31
1181b2–23 16n13*
1181b14–15 187*
1181b15–23 188*, 223*
Magna Moralia (MM)
1181a243–b27 184
1183a39–b8 7n15
1184a8–14 16n30
1184a15–38 16n36
1184b22–7 16n12
1187a14–18 19n27
1200a5–11 237*
1200b20–5 2n77
1201b1–1202a18 2n77
1213a10–26 18n6*, 18n9*
Eudemian Ethics (EE)
1214a12 2n51
1214b6–11 183*, 191*, 16n23*
1214b14–27 18n12
1214b28–1215a7 19*, 184*, 16n1*
1215a4–8 184, 2n38, 2n51
1215b23–6 196*
1216b26–39 19, 184*, 1n2, 2n9, 2n30, 2n61, 2n75, 7n14
1216b40–1217a10 11, 2n74, 22n1
1217a7–10 11, 7n15
1217a10–17 184*, 4n18
1217b21–4 2n49, 2n74
1217b26–38 3n8
1218a4 4n18
1218b31–2 22
1218b37 199*, 3n54
1218b37–1219a28 16n12
1219a1–2 2n63
1219a28 3n54
1219a35–9 16n30
1219b7–8 192*
1220a15 1n1
1220a23–9 2n63

INDEX LOCORUM

1220b2–3 123
1220b30–3 2n63
1221b4–8 2n46
1224a28–30 15n29*
1224b8–16 15n33
1225b26–7 179*
1226a17–b9 2n64
1227a1–2 20n18
1228a35–6 3n24
1229a1–9 237*
1231b10–26 19n16
1233b34–8 226*
1235b13–18 20, 23*, 16n16*
1235b24–7 2n64
1235b30–1236a6 1
1236a23–33 2n70, 2n74, 3n10
1236b21–3 184*
1237a16–18 1
1242b25–37 18n10
1244b21–1245a26 18n6
1245a29–37 18n6*, 18n9*
1245b9–13 2n75
1246a13 23
1248b18–25 21n3*
1248b25–7 2n63, 17n15*
Politics (Pol.)
1252a1–6 215*
1252a17–26 16n13
1252a26–30 215
1252a26–34, b15–16 , 215*
27–30
1252a30–2 215
1252b1–3 14n1
1252b12–14 180*, 215, 18n20*
1252b16 215
1252b27–1253a7 215*
1253a7–18 174*, 180*, 215, 14n1
1253a18–29 217*
1253b14–23 16n16, 16n18
1253b33–1254a1 19n21
1254a8–17 220*, 225*
1254a17–20 16n21
1254b19–20 19n21*
1254b22–4 220*
1254b27–34 16n21
1255a1–5, b4–5 16n18
1255a3–4 16n16
1255b4–15 19n21*
1255b12–18 19n12
1256b2–10, 26–39 215*
1256b20–6 14n1
1256b31–9 215, 18n15
1257a28–30 215*
1257b5–30 16n18
1257b13 2n9, 2n10
1257b40–1258a1 19n39
1258a2–14 19n30

1258a6–10, a35–b8 16n21
1258a19 16n16
1258b37–9 216*, 19n19
1259a39 223, 225
1259b21–1260a2 16n18
1259b22 16n16
1260a12 220*
1260a36–b2 19n19
1260b12 16n13
1260b13–18 225*
1260b27–9 188*, 19n1
1260b27–36 188*, 16n13*
1261a16–22 20n16
1261a22–b15 18n13
1261b10–15 219*, 18n12
1262b7–24 250*
1263a27–40 250*, 19n1, 19n27
1263a40–b5 250*
1263b5–14 250*
1263b29–35 219*
1264a13–40 19n22*
1264b15–25 229*, 19n7, 21n52*
1266b34–8 244*, 21n46
1266b38–1267a2 218*, 246, 21n19
1267a39–b9 21n19, 21n24
1268b33–1269a28 2n77
1269a20–4 21n46
1269a34–6 19n13
1269a39 21n39
1270b6–35 21n43
1271a13–18 235*, 21n22
1271a39–b10 218*, 222*, 19n23, 19n30, 20n16, 21n22
1272b27 16n13
1273a21–b5 19n30
1273a24–5 19n13
1273a31–b1 19n3
1274a3–11 246
1274a11–15 21n33
1274a15–17 218, 20n14*, 21n22
1274b15–18 21n16
1274b32 16n13*
1274b34–6 16n16, 16n18
1274b38 20n17
1275a22–b5 219*
1275a31–3 19n9*
1275b5–6 220*
1275b17–20 19n9*
1275b34, 39 16n16
1276a22 16n16
1276a27–30 18n14
1276a34–b9 137*
1277a5–12 18n13
1277a20–5 16n18

677

678

INDEX LOCORUM

1277a35–b7 19n16, 19n19
1277b3–7 222*, 226*
1277b7–16 219*
1277b25–32 219*
1277b33 16n16
1277b39–1278a1 2n77
1278a2–6 18n12, 20n16
1278a11–13 19n19
1278a12, 17, 21 19n19
1278a20–1 222
1278a40–b5 219*
1278b15–30 215, 216*, 233*, 20n11
1278b32–7 220*, 226*, 19n21*
1279a17–21 20n15*
1279a30–2 20n15
1279a32–b4 2n75, 21n39
1279b11–15 7n14
1279b26–1280a6 243*
1280a7–25 189*, 218*, 230*, 233*, 235*, 236*, 242*, 20n17, 21n14
1280a25–1281a4 233*
1280a31–b12 180*, 216*, 218*, 220*, 223*, 233*, 19n30, 20n17
1280a40–b23 232*
1280b2 224*
1280b5–6 19n28
1280b8–23 216
1280b12 223*
1280b29–35 215*, 230*
1280b36–1281a4 216*, 218*, 18n22*
1281a4–8 230*, 234*
1281a11, b22 16n16
1281a14–19 19n4, 21n19
1281b18 19n19
1281b28–30 218, 230*, 21n22
1282a3–7 11
1282a14–41 230*
1282a15 19n19
1282a23, 32 16n16
1282b1–13 21n16
1282b14–23 233*, 7n14
1282b30–1283a3 234*, 20n9*
1283a17–20 230*, 20n17
1283b35–1284a3 19n27
1285a29–b3 21n16
1286a3 21n16
1286b20–2 20n15, 21n14, 21n32
1287a3–6 21n16
1287a28–32 189
1287a41–b3 189, 236*
1288a32–b2 219*, 20n15*
1288b2–4 16n13
1288b3, 35 16n13
1288b10–21 248*, 21n30*
1288b10–1289a7 16n13*
1288b21–38 188*, 21n30*
1288b22–4 188*, 19n1
1289a11–25 21n16
1289a32 21n33

1289a38–b5 20n17
1289b11–26 16n13*
1289b27 21n14
1289b27–1290a13 21n14
1290a13–b20 243*, 20n17
1290b25–38 16n13
1291a4 21n23
1291a8–10, 22–8 20n17
1291a23–33 18n12
1291b30–4 21n16
1292a1–38, b5–10, 27, 37, 41 21n16
1292a13–38 246
1292b11–21 247, 19n32
1292b25–9 246*, 19n13, 19n20
1292b25–1293a10 246
1293a1–10 19n13, 19n20, 20n15, 21n33
1293a9–10, 12–34 21n16
1293b1–7 19n11*, 20n16, 20n17
1293b7–21 223*, 19n28, 20n17, 21n43
1293b22–30 16n13, 20n17
1293b42–1294a9 20n17
1294a7 21n39
1294a20–2 20n17
1295a7–24 21n16
1295a22–4 243
1295a28 21n33
1295a39–b1 218*
1295b5–21 246
1295b9–11 21n25
1295b13–25 246, 249*, 21n23
1295b21–7 244*, 18n10, 18n13*, 20n17
1296a13 21n44
1296a22–3 20n17
1296a27–b2 244*, 21n32
1296b2–12 248*, 21n39, 21n47
1296b24–34 19n19, 21n14
1297a5–6 16n18
1297a11–13 21n19
1297a14–38 21n42
1297b6–8 246, 21n22, 21n25
1297b12–26, 33 21n32
1297b16–28 20n15, 21n14
1298b13 21n44
1299a28–30 7n14
1301a19–25 16n13
1301a25–39 233*, 21n14
1301b39–1302a2 243, 20n17

INDEX LOCORUM

1302a31 218
1302b5 245*
1302b10–14 21n22
1302b33–1303a2 21n32
1303a3–10, a25–b3, b7–14 , 21n33
1303a10 21n44
1303a25–7 20n17
1303b15–17 20n17
1304a17–33 21n32
1304b20–1305a7 246*, 21n19
1305a4 21n19
1305a21–3 21n20, 21n22
1305b22–39 246
1306a9–12 248*, 21n20
1306a19–31 21n20
1306a36–b2 21n22
1306b6–16 21n33
1306b22–6 21n22
1306b34 21n22
1306b36 21n45
1307a5–33 245*, 20n17
1307a7, 24 21n19
1307a15–20 21n25, 21n44
1307a31–5 223, 225, 21n19
1307b26–39 21n43
1307b39–1308a3 21n42*
1308a9–10 235*, 21n19
1308a31–2 21n22
1308b10–16 21n23
1308b30 21n44
1308b31–4 21n19
1309a14, 20 21n44
1309a20–6 21n25, 21n51*
1309a36–9 19n11
1309b18 21n44
1309b18–1310a2 248*
1309b35–1310a2 20n17
1310a2–12 248*, 21n21, 21n44
1310a12–38 227*, 248*, 19n32, 19n36*, 21n43, 21n46
1310a22–3 21n23
1310a28–36 223, 225*
1310b2–7 20n17
1310b12–14 20n17, 21n19
1310b14–16 21n20
1310b17–18 21n32
1310b40–1311a2 21n19, 21n25
1311a2–4 19n12
1311a5–7 218, 21n19
1311a8–28 248*
1311a11 21n23
1311a15 21n44
1311a18–20 21n22
1311a25 21n19
1311a25–8, 32–6, b18–20 21n25
1312a17–19 21n22
1312a21–30 21n22
1312b23–5 21n27

1312b25–34 21n22
1313b18–29, b41 246
1313b25 19n13
1313b32–1314a29 248*, 21n42
1313b32–1314a4 246*
1314a15–25 246, 21n21, 21n25
1314a25–9 20n16
1314a33–40 20n16, 21n39
1314a5–10, b18–20 21n26
1314b23–7 21n25
1314b28–32 21n23, 21n27
1315a8–14 21n22
1315a16–31 235*, 21n22
1315b6 246
1316a1–b27 21n34
1316a13 21n44
1317a22–9 19n19, 21n14
1317a39–b2 218*
1317a40–b17 218*, 223*, 225*, 246*, 20n16, 21n14
1318a11–26 19n4, 21n14, 21n19
1318b4 244*
1318b6 235*
1318b6–27 246
1318b9–16 246*, 19n19*, 19n20*, 19n13
1318b16–17 246
1318b21–7 21n22
1318b37 21n19
1318b38–1319a1 189, 223, 225, 227*
1319a24–32 222, 19n19, 19n20
1319b1–6 19n32, 21n46
1319b19–32 223, 227*, 246, 21n42
1319b37–1320a4 248*
1320a4, 26 21n44
1320a11–17 248*
1320a17–b4 21n45
1320a35–b4 248*
1320b17–32 21n32
1321a5–14 21n33
1323a14–19 188*, 218*, 16n13*
1323a24–b3 189*
1323a40 2n9, 2n10
1323b26–31 7n15, 21n33
1323b40–1324a2 21n33
1324a13–35 18n24*
1324a25 16n16
1324b1–12 19n3, 21n22
1324b9–11 244*, 18n14
1324b32–1325a15 18n24
1325a7–10 216*, 18n14

679

680
1325a7–10, b3–14 18n24
1325a31–4 216*, 18n24
1325a34–b14 216*, 18n24, 20n15
1325b16–21 18n24
1325b33–40 19n1, 21n33
1325b7–10 219*
1326a5 21n33
1326a16–25 18n12, 19n19
1326a35–b11 215*, 18n14, 18n15
1326b12–18 18n27*
1326b26–32 220*, 19n13
1326b38–9 21n23
1327a13 16n16
1328a6–16 21n26
1328a20 2n9, 2n10
1328a21–b4 18n12
1328a35–b2 215*, 216*, 218*, 18n24, 20n11, 21n14
1328b5–23 19n21, 20n17
1328b34–1329a2 216*, 222*, 18n27, 20n16
1329a1–2 19n13
1329a7–17 19n23
1329a21–6 19n7, 20n16
1329a34–9 18n12, 19n21
1329a40 16n13
1329b41–1330a18 21n51*
1330a16–23 244*
1330a23–33 19n20, 19n21*
1332a1 21n33
1332a7–10 20n16
1332a7–27 221*
1332a19–27 248*
1332a28–b11 19n27
1332a29–32 21n33
1332b1–8 16n8
1332b12–41 219*
1333a6–16 222*
1333a30–b5 220*, 19n13
1333b10 244*, 21n19
1333b17 21n33
1334a2–40 19n13
1334a5 2n10
1334a22–8 222*
1334a22–40 220*
1334a25–34 21n23
1334a36–b4 19n16, 19n19, 19n23, 21n22
1334b6–17 227*, 20b16
1335b3 16n23
1336b11–12 246, 19n16
1336b24–6 16n16
1337a11–27 19n32, 21n46
1337a27–30 225*
1337b2–3 21n14
1337b6 246
1337b8–15 19n19
1337b14–21 222*, 226*, 246, 19n20*
1337b28–32 19n13
1338a35–7 2n74

INDEX LOCORUM

1338b29–36 19n19, 19n23
1340b5–7 2n74
1340b33–4 16n16
1341a28 19n13
1341b10–18 222*, 19n19
1342a18–28 19n16, 19n19
Rhetoric (Rhet.)
1355a14–18 2n42
1355b8–17 2n42
1355b15–21 2n40
1355b25–34 2n47
1356a27–33 2n47
1356b28–35 2n42
1356b33–1357a1 20, 2n43
1358a1–35 2n47
1359a2–5 240*
1359b12–16 2n47
1360b14–30 185*
1366a2–6 225, 20n16
1367a30–3 220*, 19n19
1385b19–21 21n23
1387b12 19n16
1390b32–1391a5 21n23
1391a20–9 21n22, 21n26
1391a33–b3 21n23
1396a28 2n10
1396b11 7n15
1402b13–1403a1 2n69
1402b23 2n10
1419b7–9 222*
Rhetorica ad Alexandrum
1427b12–30 2n38
De Philosophia
frr. 3–8, 11 8n2

B. Other Ancient Authors
CAG refers to volumes of Commentaria in Aristotelem
Graeca (Berlin, 1882–1909)

Discourses iv 1.62–75 19n14

HELIODORUS
in EN (CAG xix 2)
211.26–7 2n71

MICHAEL
in EN (CAG xx)
537.32–3 2n71

ALEXANDER

PHILOPONUS

De Anima (CAG Supp. ii 1)
15.9–26 13n37
De Fato (CAG Supp. ii 2)
3 5n2*
in Met. (CAG i)
260.2–5 8n56*
273.3–19 8n56*
460.35, 461.29 10n8*
463.18–19 10n14
463.24–6 10n18*
465.19–22 10n31*
472.9–14 10n46*
514.22 11n39
577.26–7 11n9*
Quaestiones (CAG Supp. ii 2)
i 11 (p.23.25–24.1, 24.8–11) 12n46*
ii 24 (p. 75.3–16) 12n10*
ii 26 (p.76.25–33) 13n24*
in SE (CAG ii 3)
93.26–33 7n19*
94.1–14 7n19
in Top. (CAG ii 2)
27.24–31 2n66
29.18–30.12 2n35*
181.2–6 3n10

in Phys. (CAG xvi–xvii)
9.1–3 2n62
9.6–10.22 2n62
27.9–18 3n52
258.16–22 5n5*
315.14–16 5n18
in DA (CAG xv)
90.24–5 13n8
90.27–30 13n4
585.18–21 15n7
585.25 15n8
in APo (CAG xiii 3)
142.20–143.3 7n19*

ASCLEPIUS
in Met. (CAG vi 2)
124.5–6 8n41*
377.7–8 10n8*
383.17 10n31
420.25 11n39
422.28–32 11n37
431.11 12n39

ASPASIUS
in EN (CAG xix 1)
32.30–1 15n30
27.11–13 15n27

CICERO
Academica ii 117 8n6

EPICTETUS

PLATO
Charmides (Ch.)
159a3, 7, 10 3n30
160d7 3n30
Cratylus (Cra.)
432b4–c5 12n42
Euthyphro (Eu.)
11a6–b1 28, 3n30
Gorgias (Gorg.)
483b4–484a2 21n24
Meno
71b3–8 3n30
74c3 3n30
Parmenides (Parm.)
131a–c 12n51
132a–c 10n44
140b7–8 3n40

682
Phaedo (Phd.)
65d12–e1 28
68d–69c 17n19
92a6–95a2 13n12
96d–97b 8n16*
97b8–100a7 8n16*
101c9–102a1 11
102b3–6 9n21
Phaedrus (Phdr.)
256e 17n19
Philebus (Phil.)
26e–27a 8n16
54c2 4n28
Protagoras (Pr.)
312d5 3n30
322a8–b8 217*
Republic (Rep.)
342d2–7 125
343c3–5 185*, 213*
353b–d 16n12
365c 17n19
367c2–3 185
480a6–13 7n14
493a–d 21n28
496c5–e2 248*
510b4–d3 7n11
511a3–c2 11, 76*, 86*, 7n11
511b6 8n62
533c3–e2 7n11*
533d1 8n62
533d4–e2 76*
534b3–d1 7n11
537c1–7 76*
554a–555a 17n19
561a1 21n5
602cd 14n50
Sophist (Sph.)
262bc 3n4
264ab 14n50
Theaetetus (Tht.)
152b–e 9n21
153e–154a 9n21
156c6–e7 9n24
156c6–157c3 9n21
157e–158e 9n32
172–7 19n13
182d1–183c4 9n28*
184–6 172
185b7–9 166
200d–201c 6n24
209c 12n42
Timaeus (Tim.)
27d5–30c1 7n12
30c 12n41
46c–e 8n16
77b 13n7

INDEX LOCORUM

PORPHYRY
in Catg. (CAG iv 1)
58.21–9 3n5

SEXTUS EMPIRICUS
Pyrrhonian Outlines (PH)
i 8, 10 104*
i 19, 22, 212 9n22
i 48 9n22
i 88 8n6
i 98 8n36
i 166, 173 9n34
i 168 106*
i 169 9n34
i 217–19 9n23, 9n24
ii 51–4 185*, 9n32
iii 30–6 8n6
Adversus Mathematicos (AM)
vii 167, 177, 191, 194, 248, 297 9n22
xi 163 9n17
xi 173–4 8n6

SIMPLICIUS
in Catg. (CAG viii)
7.29–32 3n5
9.4–13.18 3n5
51.14–15 4n34
85.5–9 12n46*
104.6–14 3n5
in DA (CAG xi)
217.32–218.2 12n47*
in DC (CAG vii)
295.5 12n30*
643.11–12 2n26
in Phys. (CAG ix–x)
9.10–27 2n62
10.1–2 2n62
14.30–16.13 2n62
47.21–3, 49.6–11 3n52
49.20–3 3n52
326.15–30 5n5*
335.20–6 5n13*
336.20–30 5n13*
374.18–28 5n18

INDEX LOCORUM

THEMISTIUS
in DA (CAG v 3)
14.4–8 13n8
43.6–8 13n16
79.19–20 14n10
82.10 14n24
119.17 15n8
119.9–12 15n7
120.10–17 15n21
in Phys. (CAG v 2 )
3.20–2 3n52
47.2–7 5n5*
51.1 5n13
60.9–14 5n18

683

Index Nominum
This list includes writers on Aristotle (apart from the
Greek commentators), and recent philosophers. For other
names see the General Index. More important references
are indicated by an asterisk.
Ackrill, J. L. 3n7, 3n8, 3n21*, 3n23, 3n24, 3n27, 3n31, 3n46*, 4n1*,
4n3, 4n12, 4n20*, 6n12, 11n19, 11n24, 11n29*, 11n33*, 13n17,
16n22, 16n29, 16n30, 16n36
Albritton, R. G. 12n1*, 12n3, 12n4*, 12n9*, 12n17, 12n36*
Allan, D. J. 3n50*, 6n3, 8n2, 16n3, 16n5, 19n37, 20n1, 20n6
Allen, R. E. 3n21
Alpern, K. D. 18n2
Ando, T. 16n2
Annas, J. 3n21, 5n3*, 9n32, 16n7, 17n14
Anscombe, G. E. M. 9n1, 9n5, 11n24*, 12n5, 12n14, 12n24, 15n22*
Apelt, O. 10n12
Aquinas, Thomas 10n31, 11n39, 12n17, 13n37
Armstrong, D. M. 4n11*, 4n16*, 6n4, 6n24*, 7n27, 13n38
Arpe, C. 10n31
Aubenque, P. 1n7, 2n6, 2n18, 2n28, 2n54, 2n59, 2n77, 7n13, 7n23,
8n1, 8n18, 8n20, 8n33*, 8n60*, 9n5*, 9n15
Ayers, M. R. 3n29*
Balme, D. M. 2n3*, 4n9, 5n25, 5n29
Barker, E. 2n59, 16n6, 16n20*, 18n10*, 18n26*
Barnes, J. 2n42*, 2n79, 4n9, 5n20, 6n3, 6n4*, 6n7, 6n10, 6n13, 6n16,
6n20, 6n24*, 6n26, 7n4, 7n7*, 7n14, 7n19, 7n20*, 7n22, 9n1,
13n31
Beck, L. W. 16n26
Bennett, J. 14n15*, 14n42
Berlin, I. 3n21*
Berti, E. 3n52, 7n19, 7n20, 8n1, 8n42, 8n56, 8n62, 9n13, 9n36*
Block, I. 13n33, 14n21, 14n24, 14n32, 14n38
Block, N. J. 5n29
Blumenthal, H. J. 13n37
Bolton, R. 6n12
Bonitz, H. 3n5*, 4n9, 8n54, 8n56, 9n33, 10n20*, 10n31*, 10n46*,
11n11, 18n2, 22n4*
Boorse, C. 5n22, 5n25
Bostock, D. 3n61, 3n64, 4n28
Bourgey, L. 2n15
Boyd, R. N. 11n31, 13n27, 13n38
Brandt, R. 16n13, 18n17
Brandt, R. B. 15n6
Brody, B. A. 6n19
Brunschwig, J. 2n35*, 2n42*, 8n60*, 10n1*, 10n36*
Burnet, J. 2n71, 16n6*
Burnyeat, M. F. 1n3, 6n3, 6n7, 6n24*, 8n4, 9n20, 9n22*, 10n22,
10n37, 11n7, 11n9, 11n11, 11n13, 15n17*, 15n28, 16n7, 16n8*
Carnap, R. 7n26*
Cartwright, H. M. 12n27, 12n31
Cashdollar, S. 14n24

Chappell, V. C. 12n31*
Charles, D. O. M. 5n4, 5n33*, 13n17*, 13n21, 13n40, 15n6, 15n16*,
15n17*, 15n20, 15n22*
Charlton, W. , 3n61*, 3n63, 4n24, 4n26*, 4n30, 5n18*, 10n27, 11n24,
12n14, 13n19
Chen, C. H. 12n5
Cherniss, H. F. 12n1, 12n3, 12n14, 22n14
Chisholm, R. M. 6n24, 6n25, 14n50, 15n3
Churchland, P. M. 13n38, 14n23*
Clark, S. R. L. 5n25
Clatterbaugh, K. C. 10n6
Coady, C. A. J. 14n18*
Code, A. 4n25, 4n26, 9n4, 9n12*, 9n18*, 9n2*, 10n16, 10n23*,
10n46, 11n22, 11n25, 12n1, 12n9*, 12n13*, 12n35, 12n36,
12n40
Cohen, G. A. 5n22, 5n25
Cohen, S. Marc 9n4, 10n47, 12n14, 12n24
Cohen, Sheldon M. 4n30*, 11n29*
Colle, G. 8n56*
Cooper, J. M. 5n11, 5n18*, 5n29, 5n35*, 15n24, 16n5, 16n6*, 16n23,
16n30,

INDEX NOMINUM

16n36, 16n40, 18n2*, 18n6*, 18n10, 21n10
Copi, I. M. 3n37
Cousin, D. R. 10n16*, 10n20, 10n24, 10n27, 10n47*, 12n1, 12n14,
12n33
Cummins, R. 5n22, 5n25
Dancy, R. M. 3n14, 3n29*, 3n46, 4n9, 4n21, 9n1, 9n5, 9n15, 10n15
Davidson, D. 13n38, 13n39, 14n48*, 15n3, 15n6, 15n9, 15n13
De Blic, J. 2n40
De Pater, W. A. 2n38, 2n40, 2n42, 7n9*
De Ste Croix, G. E. M. 16n19, 21n37*, 19n19
Décarie, V. 8n2, 8n42, 8n62
Dennett, D. C. 15n9, 5n27
Devereux, D. T. 3n8*, 16n3
Driscoll, J. 11n25, 12n3, 12n35, 12n40*
Duerlinger, J. 3n21, 3n23, 4n21
Düring, I. 2n14*
Dworkin, R. M. 16n6*
Easterling, H. J. 13n37
Engberg—Pederson, T. 2n20*, 7n3, 16n9, 16n30, 16n33*, 18n4,
21n3
Engmann, J. 14n50*
Eucken, R. 2n75, 5n11, 5n20, 22n4
Evans, J. D. G. 1n4, 2n53, 7n10
Falk, W. D. 15n12
Ferejohn, M. 8n51
Fine, G. J. 4n16, 5n4, 7n27, 8n16, 9n22, 10n7, 10n47, 22n14
Finley, M. I. 20n11*
Förster, A. 13n45
Fortenbaugh, W. W. 15n2
Frede, D. 6n7
Frede, M. 3n17, 3n21*, 8n42, 9n2*, 10n20
Furley, D. J. 5n18*
Furth, M. 4n9, 4n22*, 9n4, 9n18, 10n17, 11n11, 12n5
Gauthier, R. A. 1n19, 15n2*, 16n39, 18n2
Geach, P. T. 15n3
Gewirth, A. 8n37, 12n48
Gillespie, C. M. 3n7, 3n12, 3n13*
Goldman, A. 15n6
Goodman, N. 14n14
Gotthelf, A. 5n22, 5n29*, 5n37
Graham, W. 6n13
Granger, H. 6n13
Greenwood, L. H. G. 1n15*, 2n40
Grice, H. P. 14n18*
Grote, G. 1n1, 1n5*, 2n40*, 2n71, 4n21, 4n23, 7n8*
Guthrie, W. K. C. 22n14
Hadgopoulos, D. J. 6n13
Hamblin, C. L. 9n15
Hamelin, O. 2n40, 2n80*, 9n37
Hamlyn, D. W. 2n20*, 8n45, 14n32, 14n39
Happ, H. 2n40, 8n41, 8n43
Hardie, W. F. R. 13n7, 13n31, 13n33, 14n21, 16n6*, 16n22, 20n7,
20n11*
Haring, E. S. 10n20, 10n24, 10n27, 11n22
Harter, E. D. 4n20, 11n24, 11n26, 12n1, 12n4, 12n50, 12n51*
Hartman, E. 3n21, 4n11*, 4n21, 11n20*, 11n34*, 11n37, 12n1,
12n7*, 12n17, 12n24, 12n31*, 13n17, 13n27, 13n33*, 14n45*

685

Heinaman, R. E. 3n21*, 11n22*, 11n26*, 12n1, 12n4, 12n9*, 12n36,
12n51, 12n52, 12n53
Hess, W. 7n1
Hicks, R. D. 2n8*, 12n10, 13n3, 13n4, 13n8, 13n16, 13n17*, 13n37,
13n45, 14n3, 15n20
Hintikka, K. J. J. 3n62, 5n20*, 6n7*, 11n9*, 11n11*
Hirst, R. J. 14n12
Hocutt, M. 5n4*
Homiak, M. L. 17n7*
Hudson, S. D. 15n4
Hursthouse, R. 17n24
Husik, I. 3n3, 7n22
Hussey, E. L. 3n24, 14n26
Ide, H. A. 11n8
Inwood, B. 6n13*
Jaeger, W. W. 1n19, 8n2, 8n21, 8n33*, 8n4, 10n31
Joachim, H. H. 4n27*, 5n9, 20n7*
Jones, B. 3n21, 3n24, 4n11*, 4n12, 4n26, 4n27
Jope, J. 6n3, 7n10*
Joseph, H. W. B. 3n27, 3n38
Kahn, C. H. 1n23, 3n4, 3n7, 3n24, 7n3, 7n4, 13n33, 18n9*
Kapp, E. 3n17
Kenny, A. J. P. 14n32, 16n5
Keyt, D. 16n40
King, H. R. 4n30
Kirwan, C. A. 2n71, 6n12, 8n39, 8n41, 8n56, 9n1, 9n5, 10n15
Kneale, W. C. 3n35, 4n23, 6n8
Konstan, D. 2n62
Kosman, L. A. 3n1, 6n7, 7n3*, 7n27, 11n13*, 11n19*, 11n29*,
14n30, 14n40
Kraut, R. 16n34, 16n40*
Kullmann, W. 2n6, 16n5, 18n17

686

INDEX NOMINUM

Kung, J. 6n12, 10n24*, 10n27, 10n47, 12n31*
Lacey, A. R. 12n1, 12n51
Le Blond, J. M. 2n6, 2n28, 2n3*, 2n40, 2n42*, 2n45, 2n48, 2n60,
2n62, 5n36, 7n8, 8n42, 8n56, 11n11, 22n4
Lear, J. 9n1, 9n5, 9n12*, 9n15, 12n53, 14n30, 14n49
Lee, H. D. P. 7n3
Lefèvre, C. 13n33
Lennox, J. G. 5n25
Lesher, J. H. 7n3*, 12n35, 12n50
Leszl, W. 3n8, 3n52, 8n4, 8n23, 8n42, 8n43, 8n56, 10n31, 12n53
Lewis, F. A. 12n1
Lloyd, A. C. 4n11, 6n8, 10n46, 11n24*, 12n1*, 12n7*, 12n14, 12n17,
12n46, 12n47, 12n51*
Long, A. A. 9n32
Loux, M. J. 3n8, 11n25, 11n29*, 11n33*, 12n1, 12n3
Lukasiewicz, J. 9n1*, 9n15*
Lycos, K. 14n50
McClelland, R. T. 11n11
McDowell, J. H. 16n23, 17n5*
Maier, H. 9n15, 11n11
Malcolm, J. 3n1*, 3n7, 3n17
Malcolm, N. 14n23*, 14n48*
Manicas, P. T. 11n10
Mansion, A. 2n15, 8n2, 8n43, 8n49
Mansion, S. 8n22
Mates, B. 10n6
Matthews, G. B. 3n21, 4n25, 13n7
Meikle, S. 5n22, 20n11, 21n37
Merlan, P. 8n4, 8n18, 8n42
Mignucci, M. 5n20
Miller, F. D. 5n29, 13n21
Miller, R. W. 20n3
Modrak, D. K. 12n40, 14n39
Moline, J. 11n9
Moore, F. C. T. 1n4
Moore, G. E. 3n21
Moraux, P. 2n16, 2n68
Moravcsik, J. M. E. 3n6*, 3n37, 4n9, 4n21, 5n3
Morrison, D. R. 10n7
Mourelatos, A. P. D. 11n10
Mueller, I. 14n49
Mulgan, R. G. 18n17*, 18n26, 19n26, 19n37, 21n20, 21n38, 21n42,
21n48
Mure, G. R. G. 4n11, 5n4
Nagel, T. 13n38, 15n6, 16n39
Newman, W. L. 16n13*, 16n16, 16n20*, 18n16, 18n20*, 18n22*,
20n17*, 21n14
Noonan, H. W. 9n5
Nozick, R. 19n29*
Nussbaum, M. C. 5n28, 9n19*, 11n41*, 13n27, 13n40, 14n41*,
21n10
Nuyens, F. 1n19, 13n33
Owen, G. E. L. 1n15, 1n20, 1n21, 2n9, 2n41, 2n67, 2n71, 3n8, 3n12,
3n21*, 3n24, 4n18*, 7n10*, 7n19, 8n3*, 8n44, 8n45, 8n51*,
8n56*, 8n59*, 10n16, 10n23*, 10n24, 10n27, 10n32*, 10n47*,
11n29, 12n31*
Owens, J. 1n23, 2n18, 2n50, 3n5*, 3n24, 8n4, 8n12, 8n18, 8n21,

8n23, 8n24*, 8n25*, 8n33, 8n37, 8n41, 8n42, 8n45, 8n52, 10n20,
10n23, 10n24, 10n31, 10n34, 10n47, 11n22*, 12n3, 12n6*,
12n14, 12n33, 12n48*, 12n50*
Parﬁt, D. A. 16n44, 17n11
Patzig, G. 3n24, 8n42
Peck, A. L. 2n3*, 12n21
Penner, T. 11n19
Popper, K. R. 12n14, 12n43
Preisewerk, A. 10n34
Putnam, H. 1n10*, 13n34, 13n39
Quine, W. V. 7n26
Rackham, H. 16n1, 16n23
Raphael, S. 2n42, 2n40
Rassow, H. 16n39
Rawls, J. 16n6*, 16n33*, 21n17
Reale, G. 1n23, 8n24, 8n26, 8n34
Rees, D. A. 14n41, 15n2*
Régis, L. M. 2n42, 5n20, 22n3
Reichenbach, H. 7n25*
Reiner, H. 8n18*
Robinson, H. M. 4n30, 10n27, 13n31, 13n36, 13n37
Robinson, R. 16n21, 19n26, 21n48
Rodier, G. 2n48, 12n10, 13n2, 13n3, 13n8, 13n24, 13n45
Rorty, R. M. 10n23, 13n38
Ross, W. D. 1n19, 1n23, 2n62, 3n24, 3n32*, 3n51, 3n52, 4n9, 4n18,
4n23, 4n24, 6n10, 6n18, 7n9*, 7n14, 7n19, 7n22, 8n4, 8n11,
8n23, 8n25, 8n33, 8n37, 8n39, 8n49, 8n52, 8n54, 8n56, 9n2*,
9n13*, 10n12, 10n14*, 10n15, 10n16, 10n20, 10n22, 10n24*,
10n31, 10n32, 10n37, 10n41, 10n46, 10n47*, 11n9, 11n11,
11n22, 11n23, 11n35*, 11n39, 12n1, 12n5, 12n7, 12n33, 12n36,
13n33, 13n45, 14n21, 16n13, 22n13
Routila, L. 8n41, 8n18, 8n51*
Rowe, C. J. 16n13, 21n38

INDEX NOMINUM

Ryle, G. 1n13
Sachs, D. 4n11, 12n50
Sauvé, S. M. 5n4, 15n33
Schoﬁeld, M. 10n27, 14n41*
Scholar, M. C. 14n32
Sellars, W. S. 3n29, 11n14, 11n26*, 12n1*, 12n4, 12n31*
Sharples, R. W. 5n2
Shields, C. J. 13n27
Shoemaker, S. 13n34
Sidgwick, H. 1n12, 7n3, 7n9*, 7n16, 20n17*
Slakey, T. J. 13n40
Smith, J. A. 10n34
Sokolowski, R. 10n27, 12n31*
Solmsen, F. 1n19, 3n55, 4n28, 4n30, 7n13*, 7n14, 19n13*
Sorabji, R. R. K. 3n62, 5n4, 5n15, 5n22, 5n25, 5n29, 6n7, 6n8,
10n27, 13n27, 13n31, 13n40, 14n18, 14n20, 15n28
Sprague, R. K. 5n2
Stahl, D. 10n27
Stalnaker, R. C. 14n48*
Stebbing, L. S. 3n35
Stewart, J. A. 2n71, 16n39
Stich, S. P. 13n38
Stocks, J. L. 2n10*, 12n30, 19n13*
Stough, C. L. 4n21
Strawson, P. F. 3n29*
Sturgeon, N. L. 15n12
Sykes, R. D. 12n50
Taylor, C, 5n29, 5n31, 13n27, 13n39
Taylor, C. C. W. 14n33
Teichmüller, G. 16n2*, 16n20*
Thurot, C. 2n39, 8n56
Tiles, J. E. 6n13
Todd, R. B. 5n2
Torstrik, A. 5n13*, 14n3, 14n38
Tracy, T. 13n33
Trendelenburg, F. A. 3n5, 3n37
Urmson, J. O. 17n24
Van Fraassen, B. C. 6n19
Vendler, Z. 14n48
Viano, C. A. 7n8, 7n13
Vlastos, G. 1n13*, 16n19
Von Arnim, H. 10n31
Von Wright, G. H. 5n28
Waitz, T. 2n8, 4n9, 7n19, 11n11*
Wallace, J. D. 16n42
Waterlow, S. 3n62, 5n29, 5n37*
Wedin, V. E. 6n13
Weil, E. 2n42, 2n40
White, N. P. 4n3, 13n21, 16n29
Whiting, J. E. 11n26, 12n4, 12n14, 16n29, 16n40
Wieland, W. 1n6*, 1n7*, 1n20, 2n40, 3n50*, 5n28*, 7n1, 7n13*,
8n50
Wiggins, D. R. P. 3n29, 11n24, 11n34, 12n8, 13n17
Wilkes, K. V. 16n13
Williams, B. A. O. 16n44, 20n6*
Williams, C. J. F. 4n25, 4n27, 4n30, 5n9, 10n27, 14n12
Williams, D. C. 11n4

687

Wilpert, P. 1n8, 2n37, 2n40, 2n63, 2n79*, 8n56*
Wilson, M. D. 13n35
Wood, A. W. 21n37
Wood, E. M. 16n19*, 20n19, 21n2
Woodﬁeld, A. 5n22
Woods, M. J. 10n32*, 10n41, 10n47*, 12n13*, 12n16, 12n35*,
12n36, 12n39, 16n1, 16n23
Wright, L. 5n22*, 5n25, 5n30
Zeller, E. 1n1, 16n13

General Index
a priori argument 257; in ethics 16n20; in ﬁrst philosophy 147;
about soul 157
a priori conditions for perception 14n22
abstraction 171, 14n49, 8n43; and particular 12n4; and universal
science 91, 92, 8n42
action; and practical syllogism 15n16; forced 182
activity, v. passivity 195
actuality; and activity 195; ﬁrst 8, 127, 133, 135, 152, 202; and form
8, 121; of perceived object and perceiver 163, 164; prior to
potentiality 128; v. process 125, 160, 11n20, 14n4; and soul
13n37; and substance 121; and unity 152
adjectives and non-substances 29, 33, 38, 3n29
aggression (hubris) 245, 249; and menial character 222; and wealth
21n23, 21n25
agreement, universal 184
akribeia see exactness
alteration v. actuality 125, 160
altruism 18n3; in community 18n28; extended 213, 228, 229, 232;
and friendship 209; and moral virtues 208; and self-love 210;
simple v. metaphysical 209, 18n4
always, and necessity 57, 5n17, 5n20
analogy, and common principles 79
analytics, education in 11
Anaxagoras 8n16
anger 239
animals, non-rational: act voluntarily 181; have appearance without
belief 158, 168, 171, 177, 14n48; and appearance of good 174;
cannot form character 181; desires of, and intemperance 238;
incapable of rational action 15n29; lack decision 179; lack
rational discourse 215, 18n18; locomotive v. stationary 14n2,
15n1; not members of city 180; and perception 159; and
perception of time 178; soul 151, 158, 194, 16n38
Antiphon, on nature 53, 54, 55
aporia see puzzle
appearance (phantasia): and desire 174; and good 175; and memory
170; and perception 159, 166, 172, 14n3, 14n41; and reason
168, 177, 179–80, 14n50; and teleological explanation 167, 171;
and truth 168, 172; see also animals
appearances (phainomena): authoritative 13, 16, 23; cannot support
universal science 79; conﬂict with 16, 23, 2n24; conﬂicting 21,
84, 102, 104, 9n20; correct 105; discovery of new 16; empirical
v. dialectical 14, 19, 22, 45, 49, 75, 79, 157, 172, 13n1;
equipollent 104; in ethics 184; explanation of 23, 2n75; and
facts 14, 2n10; and four causes 55, 85; perceptual 15–17, 23,
77, 165, 2n13, 2n16; in progress towards intuition 78; proper
(oikeia) 88, 2n17; theory should yield 16, 2n24, 2n27; treated as
true 13
appetite (epithumia): v. decision 179; life of 218; v. rational desire
174–5; v. reason 178
arbitration, in dialectic 189, 16n18
archê see ﬁrst principle

aristocracy, types of 20n17
Aristophanes 21n28
Aristotle: and Plato 5; silences 254; system 9, 259; works aimed at
educated person 11
Aristotle's development 5, 25, 40, 49, 61, 82, 254–6, 1nn19–23,
3n45, 4n9, 7n19, 7n20; on causes 85, 8n10; on dialectic 148,
9n39; ethical works 16n5; on form 148; on justiﬁcation 106; in
Metaphysics 8n33; on parts of soul 15n2; on philosophy 83; on
substance 65, 109, 144, 255, 10n15, 12n50; on universal science
96, 8n51
artifacts, forms of 156; v. organisms 50, 126, 130, 5n26; as
substances 12n8
association see community
assumption (hupothesis) 86, 3n54, 7n14; Plato and Aristotle on 76,
7n11; sceptical attack on 106
assumption, of political system 188, 218, 20n16, 21n39
Athenian democracy 19n20
Atomism, on substance 65, 147, 12n30
attunement and soul 150–2; see also soul
autarkeia see self-sufﬁciency
authoritative (kurion) 12, 13, 16; see also appearances, common beliefs
automaton see chance
axioms see principles, common

GENERAL INDEX

banausos see menial
becoming, 37; genuine 121; unconditional (unqualiﬁed) 45–6, 4n27
begging the question 98, 100, 9n14
being; elements of 91, 8n3; no genus of 88; multivocity (homonymy)
of 27, 36, 3n8, 3n57, 7n21
being qua being 83, 91–2, 97, 119, 8n3, 8n41, 8n44; and philosophy
8n49; and PNC 98, 101; v. Protagoras 103; and substance 95,
107, 111
belief (doxa), and inference 168, 170; see also appearance
better known, by nature v. to us 1–2, 10, 18, 32, 34, 44, 66, 79, 80,
114, 145, 147, 184, 252, 1n1–4, 3n39
blame see praise
body 3n41; as matter 152; organic 131, 152; potentially alive 126,
131, 152, 13n17, 13n19; proximate v. remote 152–3, 155–6,
13n16; relation to soul 152, 13n17; and teleology 156
Bradley, F. H., on wisdom and virtue 248, 21n36
brain, and soul 155
bravery 204; common conceptions 21n5; involves proper fear 200,
238
capacity: individuation of 198; realization of 195; see also potentiality
Carthaginians 19n30, 19n3, 21n43
categories: basis 3n5, 3n17; and common principles 79; and
deﬁnitions 27; in dialectical argument 36; introduced 26; v.
Plato 3n12; and priority of substance 107; and questions 3n7;
things in two 38; types of beings 27; and words 27
cause: actual 51–2; and appearances 55; asymmetry 5n21; and
becoming 37, 137; exact 51–2, 5n5; and explanation 5n4;
internal (in agent) 182, 15n35; intrinsic v. coincidental 56, 5n3,
5n15; and nature 50; negative 15n35; and perception 162;
proximate 122, 131; and soul 151; and substance 8, 128; v.
sufﬁcient condition 57, 15n5; v. uniformity 57
cause, efﬁcient 50, 85, 5n3; centrality of 52; and ﬁnal 56; and soul
153
cause, ﬁnal 7, 85; in appearance and desire 167–8, 171, 176; and
body 156; and city 215, 18n26; v. coincident 55–6; defence
57–8, 5n18; and desire 171, 173; and determinism 55; in
dialectical argument 154; disputes 55; and dualism 155; and
efﬁcient 56, 5n9, 5n16; empirical basis 55, 58, 154; and
evolution 5n25; and explanation 58; in ﬁrst philosophy 147;
and form 127, 133; global v. local 58, 159, 5n11; in growth 58,
5n9; v. intention 85, 5n22, 5n25; and life 151; and necessity 59,
5n35; and non-teleological explanation 55, 59, 61, 5n34; and
perception 159, 163, 166; and potentiality 125, 163, 198; and
practical reason 194; and soul 157–8, 172, 183; and substance
60; and unity 153
cause, formal 7, 85, 89; and efﬁcient 51; and material, 147; and
perception 161; and Plato 8n32; and soul 151, 158; see also
form
cause, material 85, 89; v. efﬁcient 51, 53
causes, four 50–1, 145, 5n2, 5n4, 8n10; and appearances 85; defence
84; diversity 51; and principles 52; puzzles about 89; and
universal science 85, 88, 91
certainty, and justiﬁcation 7n17
chance (automaton) 56; and friendship 211; and practical reason 217;
and rational control 206
change 37, 45, 103; v. actuality 160; actuality of in patient 163; and
being perceived 163; in city 137; and compound 139; and

689

essence 114; form as principle of 12n1; Heracleitean view 102;
and nature 50; political 188; and potentiality 120, 123, 127,
11n19; Protagoras on 120; rejection of Heracleitean view 103;
and replacement 31; subject of 38, 147; and substance 31, 128,
148; total 9n27
character (êthos); adaptable 205; city's concern for 223; essence 201,
202, 212; and friendship 17n11; and habituation 200; in halfbad person 17n15; inﬂexible 240–1, 248, 21n12; v. persisting
self 202; and pleasure 182; in political system 247, 19n32; and
rational agency 199; stable 203–6, 208–9, 224, 20n13; unstable
205; virtue of 181, 202
child: friendship with parent 18n11; life of 197; outlook of 180, 196;
voluntary action 182
circular argument 68, 73, 93, 95, 106, 9n34
citizens: character of 214; and common good 223; free of menial
work 222, 19n21; and friendship 18n27; and human good 219;
in oligarchy 19n9; and political rule 20n14; as soldiers 19n23;
virtue of 217
city (polis): completeness 217, 18n16; contractual conception 232;
essential functions 223; friendship in 18n10; function 216, 250,
20n11; and human good 215, 219; ideal 188, 248, 19n1; justice
in 233; and moral education 223; non-ideal 21n47; organic
conception 225,

690

GENERAL INDEX

18n26; parts v. necessary conditions 216; self-sufﬁcient 220, 18n12;
varieties 187, 218; and wealth 19n30; and whole of life 180
class conﬂict 218
classes, v. universals 41
coherence: and dialectic 25, 76; and justiﬁcation 4, 62, 68–9, 73, 77,
78, 80, 81, 82, 165, 258
coincident (sumbebêkos) 32, 38, 39, 56, 57, 60, 64, 201, 209, 3n42,
4n3, 4n22, 5n19, 6n11; essence 99; ﬁnal causation 5n24; matter
53; subject of 101; teleology 55; see also cause
coincident, intrinsic (kath' hauto sumbebêkos) 32, 67, 88, 97, 8n24,
10n7; demonstrated from essence 92–3; studied by science 91
combination, coincidental, 39, 47, 61, 64, 108, 112, 114, 121, 132,
6n11, 10n45, 11n37; identity 118
common beliefs (endoxa); and appearances 19; authoritative 12;
critical treatment of 10; defence of 84; defence of in ethics 207;
and defence of ﬁrst principles 36; and deﬁnitions 32; in dialectic
4, 12, 18, 19, 77, 94, 95; in dialectic and ﬁrst philosophy 109,
148, 157; in dialectic and science 62; discrimination among 8;
and disputes 189; and empirical arguments 2n45; in ethics 184;
and four causes 51; fundamental 95; on happiness 185, 197; on
justice 248; on perception 162; v. perceptual appearances 14; v.
physiology 157; in political argument 188, 16n16; on political
systems 20n17; and psychology 258; and radical criticism 184;
range 2n42; rejected 23, 2n59; rejected on substance 28;
selective treatment of 19, 26, 37, 39, 49, 153, 176; and strong
dialectic 101, 106; and teleological conception of soul 157;
universally shared 23; on virtue 237, 241
common good: and bravery 238; citizen's concern for 223, 226; and
friendship 232; and good of individuals 229; and happiness
230, 237, 244; and inﬂexibility 241; and virtue 219, 228, 239
community, association (koinônia) 180, 187; and extension of
friendship 222; good of 229; and happiness 218
competition 229, 239, 245, 249; v. friendship 210; and honour
21n22
complete life 199, 17n21
completeness 18n16; of ﬁnal good 191, 192, 193, 206, 16n30;
favours normative conception of good 193; see also happiness
compound 89, 129; formal v. material 132, 134–5, 152, 157, 11n38;
formal, and growth 137; material, and change 147; separable
135; as subject of change 139; as substance 48, 139
conative conception of good see good
concealment, as dialectical tactic 100, 2n68,
concepts, acquisition 7n3; v. imagination 170
conceptual argument 3n61
concord 210, 244, 248, 21n20; and oligarchy 21n20
consciousness, and soul 153
constitution see political system
contemplation, and the good 16n40
content, of mental states 158, 161, 13n50; of thought 171
continence see incontinence
contraries, 40, 45; in becoming 37, 120, 3n65; and matter 122
contribution, and responsibility 182
convention, and common beliefs 185
cooperation, and friendship 211
count-nouns 33, 38–9, 3n29
cowardice, and prudence 205
craft, and function 16n37

Cratylus 9n23
criterion 105
Cynics, on virtue 17n16
Darwin, C. 5n25
decision (prohairesis) 179, 220; not in animals and slaves 216;
necessary for citizen 180; v. crafts 16n25; basis of ethical
argument 191; in ethical agent 183; v. non-rational desire 203;
necessary for virtue 181, 225, 15n27; see also deliberation
deﬁnition 3n44; and categories 27; of compound and form 11n26;
dialectical and physical 157; and explanation 85; and intrinsic
properties 32; of natural kind 27, 141; natural priority in 66;
and particular 141–2; of soul 158, 13n45; and spatio-temporal
properties 141; and this 115
deliberation (bouleusis) 210; and appearance 177; and comparison of
alternatives 179; conception of good 16n33; and desire 15n22;
about ends 15n24, 17n6; basis of ethical argument 16n6;
extension of 215, 217; in friendship 211–12, 222; in
intemperate person 17n18; in political friendship 214; and
realization of capacities 195; scope 178; and time 191; and
wisdom 228, 237
demagogues 246
demand see need
democracy: on citizenship 220; equality in 19n4; faults 21n19;
freedom in 218, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 20n16; view of
happiness 19n30; justice in 233; v. oligarchy

GENERAL INDEX

243, 20n17; on ruling 234; stereotypes of 21n28; treatment of losers
in 21n44; vices of 248, 246
Democritus 7, 44; ontology 96; on scepticism 102, 9n20; on soul
13n6; on substance 121, 12n30
demonstration: circular 68, 69; and common principles 79; and
problem of criterion 105; v. dialectic 75, 80, 6n1, 7n10; not in
ethics 184, 16n3; and experience 12; not for ﬁrst principles 4,
72; when inappropriate 104–6; v. inﬁnite regress 70; and
intrinsic coincidents 32, 141; and justiﬁcation 73; possible in
mathematics, not in ethics 11; and natural priority 66; and
philosophy 7n14; and preliminary questions 90; premisses of
74, 77; from proper principles 7n15; puzzles about 8n22; by
refutation (elenctic) 97, 100, 9n15, 9n18; and science 4, 83, 88;
and universal science 93
deontological theories 229
Descartes 2n40, 8n7; on history of philosophy 84, 262; on intuition
84, 7n17; on materialism 13n35; on soul and body 13n37
desire: and action 171; animal 203; and apparent good 175; and
appearance 167; deliberative 15n22; and happiness 181; as
mover 15n4; non-rational 17n4, 17n5; non-rational, and virtues
200, 204, 238, 17n4; object of 174; and perception 159, 173;
and pleasure 173; rational 177, 178, 200; second-order 179;
strength of 179; teleological role 158, 173; unity 174–6
desiring part, inseparable 173
determinism 120, 3n62, 5n15, 5n20; assumed 37; and teleology 55
dialectic: aims 49; arbitration 189; Aristotelian and Platonic 7n13;
categories 26, 36, 79; coherence 25, 165; and common beliefs
4, 34, 148; common places 2n47; and common principles 79,
88; constructive role of 3; counterintuitive theses 19, 21, 23;
critical 88; debate 26, 1n15; and deﬁnitions 27; v.
demonstration 75, 80, 6n1, 7n10; development in Aristotle's
view 148, 9n39; difﬁculty in ﬁnding truth 172; and discovery
22; and educated person 11; and empirical argument 22, 24, 61,
148, 157, 162; encounter (enteuxis) 18; in ethics 9, 184, 192,
16n6; evaluates methods 11, 23; examination (exetazein) 18, 184,
2n38; and ﬁrst philosophy 3n50; and form 54; studies form
rather than matter 162; and four causes 50–1; and friendship
209; functions 18, 22, 2nn 35–6, 2n40; has no genus 79; use of
grammatical arguments 26, 33; gymnastic function 18, 22, 35,
76, 80, 3n52; and history of philosophy 84, 262; use of
homonymy 27; ideological function 189; induction in 22, 2n63;
inquiry and justiﬁcation 172; and intuition 75; role in
justiﬁcation 76, 78, 81; limitations 7, 36, 40, 43, 44, 50, 52, 53,
58, 62, 75, 77, 82, 94, 96; logical 26, 35, 44, 46, 79, 83, 92, 114,
2n48, 7n15, 8n48, 10n32; method 18, 83, 100, 153; in moral and
political theory 9; use of multivocity 36, 8n37; and natural kinds
3n13; and new starts 22, 23, 26, 91, 95, 111, 119, 192, 256; nonempirical aspects 24; objections to use of common beliefs 261;
and objective principles 7, 35, 255; peirastic 76, 97, 8n56; and
philosophy 3, 6, 10, 8n56, 8n59; Platonic and Aristotelian 76,
1n13, 3n12; and PNC 100, 9n13; political implications 9; and
positivism 81; and prejudice 9; and principles 3, 12, 18, 36, 46,
58, 62, 73, 75, 76, 83, 7n9, 7n10; questions (problêmata) 20, 26,
2n46; redirecting (metabibazein) 18, 2n39; v. science 8, 62, 71, 82;
and science of being 8n59, 8n60; and second-order questions
94; superﬁcial conclusions 39; tactics 100, 2n68; and teleology
154; terms in Categories 3n3; and construction of theory 22;

691

theses in 19; and truth 189; and universal science 5, 94–5;
universal and particular in 22, 2n62; and universal agreement
2n71; and virtues 248; see also common beliefs, puzzle
dialectic, pure 6, 7, 9, 37, 50, 51, 58, 59, 60, 61, 85, 91, 94, 97, 100,
106, 114, 119, 121, 146, 147, 3n50; in ethics 185, 16n20; in
politics 189; on substance 109
dialectic, strong v. pure 8, 19, 25, 61, 85, 94, 95, 96, 97, 100, 106, 111,
114, 116, 148, 150, 154, 166, 176, 182, 186, 190, 194, 207, 217,
228, 236, 237, 239, 241, 252, 253, 257; and foundationalism
260; and human good 198; in moral and political argument 9,
190, 256 outside Metaphysics 9; and PNC 101; premisses of 101;
on substance 109; uses of 258
difference: in being 45, 152, 13n21; difference, numerical v.
qualitative 136–7, 12n17, 13n21, 13n26
differentia 44, 3n18, 3n46; anomaly 33; v. necessary property 3n47
disputes: about ﬁnal good 192; in politics 189
doxa see belief

692

GENERAL INDEX

dualism , see soul
educated person (pepaideumenos) 11, 25, 97, 8n17; and dialectic 79,
2n6
egoism 18n3; psychological 16n32
eidos see form, species
Eleatics 35, 53, 60, 96, 3n57, 8n11
emotion, v. decision 179
Empedocles 2n14; on teleology 55, 57–8; on soul 13n6
empirical inquiry 8, 10, 165, 2n8; and appearances 13; and common
beliefs 2n45; v. dialectic 7, 18, 22, 24, 61, 148, 157; in ethics
184; and ﬁrst philosophy 147; and human nature 190; and
intuition 75; and justiﬁcation 78; limitations of 17; and
materialism 156; naïve realism in 25; role of observations 14,
166; and perception 162, 14n22; in political argument 188, 242,
249, 253; and principles 12; and puzzles 14; and substance 65;
and teleology 55, 58, 154, 5n25, 5n29, 5n37
empiricism 10, 165; on intuition 78; on perception 165; and realism
17
endoxa see common beliefs
ends: and deliberation 15n24, 17n6; and rational desire 176
enstaseis see objections
entertaining proposition 168, 170, 14n43
epagôgê see induction
Epictetus, on freedom 220
Epicurus, on perception 14n33
epistêmê see knowledge
epistemology, and realism 4
equality: conceptions of 235; and justice 20n11
essence 39; assumed by science 92; and change 103, 114, 147; and
character 201–2; in demonstration 66, 93; and explanation 6, 8,
63, 64, 67, 85, 6n7, 6n12; as form 54, 116, 129, 133; as form
and compound 132; formal v. material 130; and friendship 209;
immaterial 12n49; v. intrinsic coincident 6n13; and knowledge
118; and necessity 102, 6n8, 6n21; and particular 116, 201, 212,
12n38; of persons 197; and PNC 98–9; and potentiality 120; v.
proprium and necessary properties 32; real 32; and science 8,
88, 97; and self 202; and soul 183; and subject 114, 118; and
substance 28; things identical to 134, 147, 11n37, 11n38;
grasped by thought 169; universal and particular 114, 140
essence, human 182, 194, 210, 215, 217, 241, 253; and essential
potentialities 200; in ethics 9, 183, 258; and friendship 201; and
human good 186, 197; and rational agency 204, 206; and virtue
199, 207
essentialism 4n22
ethics: coherence in 260; v. demonstration 11, 184, 16n3; dialectic in
184; and empirical inquiry 188, 242; and ﬁrst philosophy 149,
190; method of 9; and politics 9, 187; practical discipline 16n2;
and psychology 258; strong dialectic in 258
eudaimonia see happiness
eulogon see reasonable
euporia 2n50
events: and explanation 59; individuation 59, 5n15, 5n33;
evolution, and teleology 5n25
exactness (akribeia) 11
examination (exetazein) see dialectic
experience (empeiria): in empirical inquiry 14; importance 2n15; and
perceptual appearances 22; ﬁnds principles 12; and universal

169
explanation: of appearances 23; assumptions about, in testing
theories 16; asymmetry 163; and background conditions 15n5;
and basic subjects 64; best 67; double, of same event 5n34; and
essence 63–4, 6n7, 6n12; and events 59; and form 136–7; and
four causes 51, 5n4; and knowledge 6n24; and necessity 63;
non-transitivity 69; and objects of science 147; and potentiality
124–5, 127; priority in 67, 72; and realism 52; in science 63;
search for 85; and soul 154; and substance 65; teleological and
non-teleological 58–9, 61, 5n22; and understanding 7n3
explanatory properties: formal and functional 120, 147; and
substance 119
extensionality, failure of 41, 8n24
fairness, and justice 230, 233
families, friendship in 214
ﬁne (kalon): actions 216; and common good 239; and good 21n3; in
adverse conditions 221; v. menial actions 222; and praiseworthy
185; and right 21n4; virtue 199, 208, 237, 239
ﬁrst philosophy 4, 6, 83, 121, 148, 8n49; a priori argument in 147;
argument in 9n2; danger of incoherence 165; v. dialectic 3n50;
v. dialectic and empirical inquiry 157; in ethics 149; v. logic 3n5;
method of 8; modiﬁcation of common beliefs 157; in moral
and political theory 252; in philosophy of mind 149, 154, 156,
172, 256; in psychology and ethics 9; in rest of Aristotle's
philosophy

GENERAL INDEX

182; v. special sciences 92; and strong dialectic 257–8; and substance
255
ﬁrst principles see principles
ﬂattery 205, 246; and slavishness 222
focal connexion 92, 8n45, 8n51; of substance 139, 144
forced action 15n33
foresight, in human beings 215
form: as actuality 8, 121, 128; and becoming 11n22; and causal laws
61; as cause 54; and change 103; relation to compound 134,
11n33, 11n38; conceptions of 60; deﬁnition of 11n26;
development in Aristotle's view 148 difﬁculties 54; and dualism
155; and efﬁcient cause 60, 5n1; as essence 54, 120, 129–30,
133; and explanation 133, 136, 137; as expression v. realization
161; as ﬁrst actuality 127, 133, 136; as function 133; in growth
5n9, 12n24; of human beings 183; immaterial, and thought 169;
immateriate v. materiate 130, 133–5, 152, 157, 13n17; relation to
matter 127, 157, 11n24, 12n12; and nature 53, 60, 5n7; not
mentioned 3n45; in nutrition 202; in perception 161–2, 14n13;
as potentiality 120; as principle 8n27; priority of 110, 144; and
process 160; v. quality 5n8; as second substance 60; and species
11n25, 12n36; as subject 110–11, 10n20; as substance 7–8, 48,
65, 110, 116, 3n5; and teleology 127; as this 120, 151, 5n8; and
unity 155; and universal 54, 137
form, particular 136, 202, 5n25, 12n1, 13n26; in change 12n1; in
generation 137; relation to matter 12n45; v. property 143; and
soul 153; as substance 8, 135, 138–9, 144
Form, Platonic 63, 79, 85, 89, 3n12, 8n29, 10n44, 12n5
formal criteria, for ﬁnal good 192
fortune: and happiness 196, 240; and aggression 21n23; role in
political systems 247
foundationalism 4, 71, 73, 77, 82, 106, 165, 166, 172, 255, 260, 6n25;
and realism 17
four causes see causes
freedom: aspects 226, 19n4; in democracy 218, 224–5, 227, 246,
20n16; and happiness 250; importance 235; and leisure 221;
and living as we please 223, 226; and moral education 225, 227;
v. necessity 220; and rational agency 220; v. slavery 220, 250;
and virtuous action 220
friend: as another self 210, 212, 214, 232, 18n11; concern for 201;
and magnanimous person 220; as mirror 18n6
friendliness 214
friendship; active and passive aspects 195; for advantage 20n11; and
altruism 209; beneﬁt of 219, 18n5; and character 201, 17n11;
of citizens 214, 18n10, 18n27; in city 222; and common good
216, 232; and community 187; complete 209; defence of 211;
different types 18n2, 18n28, 19n10; extension 214; and
freedom 220; and good of others 229, 232; needed happiness
208; involves living together 216; and menial actions 226; and
moral education 224; and political activity 219; in political
systems 244; and private property 250; and rational agency
221; and self-sufﬁciency 227; of unequals 20n12
function (ergon): and craft 16n37; and form 133, 135; and goodness
207, 16n12; and happiness 199; human 194, 16n39–41; and
substance 8; and virtue 207
future, concern for 202, 204
generation, and form 137
generosity 204, 239; and freedom 220; and private property 250,

693

21n54
genesis see becoming
genus, as substance 12n41
god: becoming 17n9; not dependent on city 217
good: apparent 174–5; and city 215; complete 180; conative v.
normative conception see happiness; conception of 180, 182;
and essence 186; ﬁnal 191, 196, AND see happiness; and
function 207; of individual and community 187; parts of
16n30; relation to perception and desire 159; v. pleasure 180;
and rational agency 183; self-conﬁned 237–9
goods, contested 218, 238, 19n30; and justice 231
goods, external 211, 218; and chance 206; importance 235; and
private property 251; right level of concern for 206; and selfrealization 205; in special justice 230, 232; and vicious person
205; and virtue 204; see also happiness
goodwill 210, 214, 18n2, 18n3, 18n11; and friendship 209
grammar, appeal to 29, 31, 33, 38–40, 44, 114, 3n7, 3n24; and
doctrine of categories 27; see also dialectic
gratiﬁcation, life of 196, 218, 235, 246, 21n27
greed (pleonexia) 228, 20n4; and aggression

694

GENERAL INDEX

245; and competition 229; and corrective justice 231; and injustice
20n6; in oligarchy 21n19; in rich and poor 21n24
Green , T. H., on history of philosophy 262, 22n15
growth 5n9; of city 215; and form 12n24; and formal compound
137; and life 151; and teleology 58
gymnastic see dialectic
habituation see moral education
half-bad person 17n15
happiness (eudaimonia): choiceworthy 16n36; and citizen 219; and
city 223, 225; and common good 230, 237, 244; complete and
self-sufﬁcient 208, 211, 215, 216, 217, 219, 241, 16n30, 18n24;
conative v. normative conception 193–4, 203, 204, 208, 232,
238, 16n33, 16n45, 18n4; conception of in human beings 183;
conceptions 233; constituents 189; and deliberation 179;
external goods, 233, 239–40, 248, 20n14, 21n10; false
conceptions 235, 19n30, 19n32; as ﬁnal good 195–6; and
freedom 250; and friendship 208, 212; leisure 220; and
modiﬁcation of particular desires 181; and non-ideal state
21n47; oligarchic conception 218; parts 185; and political
activity 223, 234; political constituents 219; in political systems
218; and radical critics 186; self-conﬁned aspects 232, 250; and
self-realization 198; and theoretical study 16n40, 18n24; as
ultimate end 191; and virtue 199, 224; and wisdom 228
heap, v. whole 138, 153, 192, 12n8, 12n30
heart: and perception 14n21; and soul 155, 13n33
Heracleitean view of change 102, 103;
Heracleitus 35
hired labourers 19n19
historia see empirical inquiry
history of philosophy, study of 262
homoeomereity 48, 4n33
homonymy 6, 27, 150–1, 217, 228, 3n8, 3n9, 3n31, 4n2, 7n21; in
dialectical argument 2n69; in science 65; and senses of words
27; and soul 157; see also matter, multivocity
honour: and competition 245; and distributive justice 230; life of
218, 235; love of, and political instability 21n22; love of, effects
21n12, 21n26; right attitude to 206, 239; v. slavishness 246; and
vice 241
household 18n20
hulê see matter
human being: essence 215, 217; only ethical agent 181; form of 183;
naturally political 187, 193, 208, 215, 18n17; nature 9, 187, 188,
190, 208, 215, 19n1; nature, and private property 251; soul 183,
194
Hume: mind and external objects 1n11; passion 15n13; perception
7n17; psychological hedonism 16n32; realism 2; reason 15n12;
reason and desire 170, 176; responsibility 181, 15n31
huparchonta 2n10, 2n64
hupokeimenon see subject
hupothesis see assumption
husband, and wife 180
identity 132, 153, 156, 10n45, 11n34, 12n16, 13n21; of body and
soul 152; coincidental 11n37; criterion 117–18
ideology v. political theory 252
idion see special property
idiosyncrasies 212
ignorance, and involuntary action 182

imagination, v. concept 170
immortality 155, 14n2
incontinence (akrasia) 175, 15n4, 17n14, 17n20; and deliberation
15n22; investigation of 12; Socrates on 21; and vice 203
indeﬁnite article 29, 3n25
individuation, principles of 12n14
indivisibility see unity
induction 15, 2n20; conclusion of 2n22; and dialectic 22, 2n63; in
empirical inquiry 10, 22; and generalization 15; and intuition
74; naïve view of 166; relies on perceptual appearances 17; v.
syllogism 15
inference: v. animals 177; v. appearance 167; and belief 168; and
thought 170
inﬁnite regress 68, 70, 73, 93, 95, 106, 165, 9n34; sceptical use of
105
inherence 28–30, 38–9, 40, 42–3, 46, 3n21, 3n23, 3n27, 3n37, 6n9;
see also strong predication
injustice, and false views of happiness 235; and instability 248;
injustice, general, and intemperance 238
insensibility v. temperance 206
intellect, and thought 169
intemperance 17n18; effects 21n6; and prudence 205; and
slavishness 246
interest, concern for 209
intrinsic properties: v. coincidents and necessary properties 32; in
demonstration 141; and essence 6n13; and explanation 63; and
universals 63
intuition 7, 73–4, 82, 7n3; and common principles

GENERAL INDEX

79; Descartes on 84, 7n17; difﬁculties 80; in ethics 16n6; and
inquiry 75; in justiﬁcation 258; objections to 78; and principles
76–7, 83, 92–3, 106, 9n36, 9n37; types of 1n12
justice: and altruism 213; commercial 231, 20n11; commitment to
244; corrective 231; democratic conception 246, 248; different
conceptions 243; disputes about 189; distributive 230, 232,
20n7, 20n9; and equality 243; errors about 233, 235; and
happiness 217; Lycophron on 223; oligarchic conception 248;
and political change 247; in political friendship 214; in political
systems 234, 242, 20n17; and punishment 20n10; puzzles about
236; retrospective and prospective aspects 230–1; slavish people
disregard 246; Thrasymachus' criticism 185; and worth 233
justice, general 228; and laws 185; and virtue 237, 20n1
justice, special 229, 232; and self-conﬁned interests 250
justiﬁcation 4, 70–1, 172; Aristotle's arguments 258; and certainty
7n17; and circularity 73; coherence 68–9, 76; and
demonstration 73, 105; and dialectic 76; difﬁculties for
Aristotle 82; and foundationalism 165; and intuition 82; of
moral and political claims 252; and principles 75, 93; and
science 62; and science of being 106; see also circular argument,
coherence, foundationalism, intuition
Kant: on antinomies 90, 8n34; argument for moral law 192; and
Aristotle's view of dialectic 24; ethical theory 229; on intuition
14n47; on metaphysics 86, 92, 8n18; on reason and perception
172; on scepticism 90; on synthesis 170
kinds, natural 63–4, 119, 3n13; and deﬁnition 141; role in induction
15
kinêsis see change
knowledge: and demonstration 6n26; and essence 118; and
explanation 6n24; of particular 12n53; of principles 106;
priority in 67; scientiﬁc 1, 4; and understanding 6n24
koinônia see community
kurion see authoritative
law: and justice 20n1; Lycophron on 223; role in moral education
185, 248; role in political system 21n16
legislator, concern for virtue 224
Leibniz 10n6
leisure (scholê 216, 19n13; and freedom 221; and happiness 220; v.
menial character 222; value of 225
life: complete 180, 206; conception of 195; deliberation about 191;
extent of 180; and function 16n39; whether homonymous 151;
and human function 194; perception and thought in 211;
teleological conception 151; whole, and conception of good
181, 183, 192
lives, favoured types 196
living together, value of 215–16
Locke, on persistence 131
logic, v. ﬁrst philosophy 3n5
logikôs see dialectic, logical
luck (tuchê) 56, 5n13
Lycophron, on law 223
machines 19n21
magnanimity (megalopsuchia) 239; v. aggression 245; v. dependence on
others 220; and external goods 240; and honour 21n12; and
menial actions 226
magniﬁcence (megaloprepeia) 237, 239; effects 21n8; and external
goods 240; and freedom 220; v. menial character 222

695

manual workers 222, 19n25; not citizens 220
many and wise, views of 16n1
marriage 215
Marx v. Aristotle 21n37
materialism 85, 8n11, 13n38; eliminative v. reductive 156; rejected 7;
soul 150–1, 156
matter: and body 152; and categories 10n27; in Categories 40; and
efﬁcient cause 5n1; and form 13n17; in growth 5n9;
homonymy principle 131, 135, 138, 152, 155, 11n29;
introduction of 4n28; and nature 53, 60; and particular form
202; and particular substance 212; in perception 161, 162;
persistence of 4n26; and potentiality 121, 126; and predicationformula 112; prime 47, 103, 4n30, 10n27; as principle 8n27;
prior to non-substance 112; proximate v. remote 131, 135,
138–9, 152, 157, 162, 11n29, 12n32, 14n20, 14n21; secondary to
form 138; separable 112; silence about 3n45, 4n9; and subject
60, 85, 112; and substance 40, 47, 65, 110, 113, 139, 4n31,
12n26, 12n30; and this 48, 135, 138, 12n31; and thought 169;
unity of 48
mean, doctrine of 200, 204, 207, 237, 249; and the ﬁne 237
Megarians 11n7; and perception 14n31; and potentiality 123

696

GENERAL INDEX

memory, in animals 169, 177; and appearance 166–7, 170
menial (banausos); character 206, 246, 19n16, 19n23; life 216; work
19n19, 19n20; work v. menial character 222, 246; workers, not
citizens 234
mental states: and selective description 158; in teleological
explanation 167
metaphysics: Aristotle and Kant on 86, 90; and ethics 190, 207, 212,
241, 252; and friendship 209; name 8n18; in political theory
234, 252; second-order 92
Metaphysics: structure of 8n4, 8n33, 10n2, 10n23; unity of 83, 111,
146, 8n4; Book iii, function 7; Book iv, and ﬁrst philosophy 8;
Book iv, v. Organon 5
method: and educated person 11; empirical v. dialectical 10, 22, 25;
of inquiry 165; in moral and political theory 9; of philosophy 4;
of political argument 9; see also dialectic, empirical inquiry
middle class 249
Mill, on psychological hedonism 16n32
mind: and content 158; and soul 155, 158
minimalist plans 206
miserable (athlios) 240
mixed actions, and lack of leisure 220
money, role of 20n11
moral education 185, 200, 223, 17n4, 19n31, 19n35; and concord
248; defence of 224; and freedom 225, 227, 251; and
habituation 181, 200, 207, 227, 251; importance of 16n8; and
mistakes about happiness 244; in political system 227
moral theory: direction of argument 186; and ﬁrst philosophy 259;
method 9; structure 253
multivocity (pollachôs legesthai) 3n31; in dialectic 36; limitations of
appeals to 8n37; and PNC 9n6; and substance 111, 10n14; see
also homonymy
names, ordinary 3n10
nation (ethnos) 18n14
natural philosophy, and dialectic 26
nature: and cause 50; completed by virtue 200, 207; in ethics 212,
16n21; and form 53; human see human being; nothing pointless
159, 14n1; and potentiality 125; and teleology 60; and the usual
5n20; and virtue 199
necessary property 43, 99, 4n3, 4n22; v. differentia 3n47; v. intrinsic
property 32
necessities, virtuous person's attitude to 206
necessity 3n42, 5n11, 6n21; and always 5n20; conditional v.
unconditional 59, 5n32, 5n35; de re 6n8; and demonstration 66,
69; and essence 6n8, 6n21; and explanation 63; v. freedom 220;
in science 63, 6n7; and teleology 59
need, v. demand 20n11; in justice 231; and private property 251
new start see dialectic
nominalism see realism
Non-Contradiction, Principle of (PNC) 8, 97–101, 104, 9n1, 9n15,
9n18; and being qua being 101; and conﬂicting appearances
9n20; defence of 98; and dialectic 100; relation to essence and
substance 99; formulations of 9n1; implications of 99;
indemonstrable 97; and Protagoras 102; and strong dialectic
101
non-substances: depend on substances 29, 42, 108, 3n7, 4nn18–23,
10n6; particular 31, 43, 3n21, 10n6
normative conception of good see good

nouns 3n46
nous see understanding
nutrition: not purely passive potentiality 160; and form 202
objections (enstaseis), in dialectical argument 2n69
objective see principles, realism
observation see empirical inquiry
oikeiai archai see principles.
oligarchy: citizenship 19n9; conception of city 235; conception of
happiness 218, 19n30; concord in 21n20; dangers to 21n24; v.
democracy 20n17; faults of 21n19; on justice 233; on ruling
234; treatment of losers 21n44; virtue in 248
Organon, v. Metaphysics iv 5
origin see cause
ousia see substance
paradox 35
paronymy 39–40, 3n24; as test for inherence 29
particular 41, 113, 212, 12n25, 12n42, 12n46; abstract 12n4; bare
4n19, 4n22, 9n12; and deﬁnition 134, 141–2; and essence 141;
everlasting 141; expressions for 3n19; as form and compound
134; as form and matter 134, 144; in induction 15; and
knowledge 63, 142, 12n53; and matter 135; non-repeatable
141; non-substance see non-substance; and PNC 99; as principle
8n29; not prior in knowledge 142; priority of 12n46; as
substance 107, 141, 144; v. universals 28; and universals, in
dialectic 2n62
parts: ensouled 156; and homonymy 4n2;

GENERAL INDEX

inseparable 138; v. necessary conditions 216; not substances 138,
12n32
passion, in Hume 176
passivity, v. activity 195
peirastic see dialectic
Peisistratus 21n24
perception (aisthêsis) 9; as acquiring form 161; in animal soul 133,
194, 11n39; in appearance 159, 172, 14n3; as becoming actual
from potential 161–2; as becoming like the object 161–2;
beneﬁt of 159, 14n2; and causation 162; coincidental 166,
14n38; common features 159; complex 166; and desire 159,
173; in empirical inquiry 10; and formal cause 161; and
formation of concepts 7n4; formulae of 161; formulae of, and
thought 14n44; and heart 14n21; infallibility of 165, 172,
14n32; and knowledge of objects 164; and life 211; objects of
103; organ of 162; organ v. faculty 14n20; and perceptible
qualities 123; as process and activity 160; in rational perceivers
172; and realism 163; receives form without matter 162–3, 166;
and sceptical argument 102; and science 63; second-order 166,
14n40; and self-evidence 72; as source of authoritative
appearances 13; special objects of 165; teleological account
of 159, 166; and thought 169, 172; and truth 168, 172; uniﬁed
166; veracity of 9n21
persistence 138, 153, 212, 241, 12n8, 12n16, 12n19, 13n26, 17n11;
of particular form 202; of person 180, 183, 202; and soul 150
person, essence 197
phantasia see appearance
philosophy 8n2; Aristotle and Plato on 7n14; Aristotle's conception
6, 96; studies being qua being 8n49; and common principles 88;
and dialectic 10, 94, 8n56, 8n59; ﬁrst see ﬁrst philosophy;
history of 84, 90, 8n6; method of 3–4; of mind 149; modern
conceptions of 6, 81; and science 6; as science of principles 83;
scope 8n55
physiology, empirical 14n22; in account of the soul 162; and
common beliefs about soul 157
plants 13n7; lack perception 161; soul 151, 159, 13n7
Plato: on appearance and belief 14n50; Aristotle's criticism of
22n14; on assumptions 7n11; on being 8n3; Callicles on
democracy 21n24; on causes 8n16; on common views of
virtues 185; on constitutional change 21n34; criticized 3n12;
on democracy 248; development 5; on dialectic 3, 76–7, 81–3,
86, 96, 1n13, 3n12, 7n12; on dualism 150; on evaluating
methods by dialectic 11; on formal cause 8n32; on Forms 44;
on friendship 250; on ideal city 229, 19n7, 19n20, 20n16;
inﬂuence on Aristotle 5; on justice 18n1; on justice and
misfortune 240; on justice in the soul 17n5; method of
dialogues 252; on moral scepticism and nihilism 184; on
ontology 96; on particularity 12n42; on parts of soul 175,
15n2; on philosophy 7n14; on private property 250–1; on
Protagoras and Heracleitus 9n21, 9n22; on reason and
perception 172; on senses and common objects 166; on
separated universals 42; on soul 155, 13n10, 13n23, 13n29; on
soul and person 155; on speciﬁc and generic Forms 12n41; on
substance and cause 7; on super-sensitive reality; treats a such as
a this 12n2; on unity of ideal city 21n52; on universal science
8n62; on universals 4n13; on vice 17n19; see also Third Man
plausible see reasonable

697

pleasure: in animals 177; and character 182; in child 196; and desire
159, 167, 173; v. forced action 182; v. good 175, 180; and
happiness 197; and intemperance 17n18
pleonexia see greed
PNC see Non-Contradiction
poion see quality
polis see city
political activity: and friendship 219; and happiness 234; value 216,
218, 233
political community, nature of 235
political science, political theory 215, 17n6; aims 188; difﬁculties
189; and ethics 187; functions of 185, 235, 248, 252, 16n13,
21n38; and human nature 190; method 9; strong dialectic in
190; supervisory 191, 16n25; wisdom in 20n1
political system (politeia); assumption of 20n16; best 218; change in
21n37; character corresponding to 247, 19n32; correct v. deviant
20n15; and justice 230, 234; material basis of 243; mixed
21n43; and moral education 227, 248; stability and instability in
247, 249; tricks used in 21n42; variety 242, 243, 21n14
Politics, importance 261; relation to Ethics 9; structure 188, 16n13
pollachôs legesthai see multivocity
positivism, and Aristotle on dialectic 81, 7n25
possibility: v. potentiality 122, 123, 11n10; conditions for realization
3n43, 11n9
potentiality: actualizing 123; and body 126, 13n19, 126, 14n11; and
change 103, 120,

698

GENERAL INDEX

127, 11n19; and essence 120; explanation 124–5; ﬁrst v. second 160;
for life 152; and matter 121, 126; and nature 125; nontransitivity 126; passive 160; and perception 161; possibility
122–3, 11n10, 11n11; proximate v. remote 124–5, 131, 152,
162–3, 200, 11n18; range 122; rational v. non-rational 123, 125,
15n28; and souls 194; and substance 8, 120; and teleology 125,
163; and virtue 200
praise (and blame) 181, 237, 21n3; not for animals and children 182;
and character 182; conditions for 181; and the ﬁne 185; objects
of 15n30
predecessors, Aristotle's treatment of 37
prejudice, in dialectic 9
preliminary questions 86, 90, 99, 110–11; about ﬁnal good 192; and
puzzles 236; and soul 150
Presocratics 85, 96, 22n14; on perception 161, 14n12; on soul 151,
155; on substance 92, 107, 119; on teleology 55; on universal
science 146
price, just 20n
pride, proper 204
principles (archai): approach to 10, 26; and causes 52; and cognitive
status 72; common 79, 81–2, 97, 7n22; common, and science
of substance 8n26; common, and universal science 88, 93,
7n18; defence of 36; and dialectic 12, 18, 24; endoxic v.
objective 34, 50; importance of 254; and intuition 82;
justiﬁcation of 71, 75, 77, 93; knowledge of 106; material and
formal 8n27; natural priority of 1n7; objective 7, 10, 25–6, 35,
36, 49, 52, 58, 60, 61, 62, 66, 69, 83, 94, 106, 154, 252, 255, 257,
258, 260; particular and universal 8n29; and Platonic dialectic
76; proof of 62; proper (oikeiai archai) 6, 11, 12, 35, 72, 77, 80,
82, 2n17, 7n15, 7n22; propositional and non-propositional 1n6,
52; puzzles about 89; and science 66; self-evident 35, 62; and
understanding 7n8
priority 1–2, 34, 41–2, 108, 145, 4n18; of actuality 128; in being 89;
in deﬁnitions 32; in demonstration 68; in explanation 43; of
form 144; in knowledge 67, 73, 89, 141–2; natural 18, 52, 62,
66, 67, 70, 72, 74, 79, 1n7, 6n18, 10n8; natural, of city 217; of
particular and universal 143
private property: defence 250; and leisure 21n51; objections to 251
problêma see dialectic, questions
process, v. actuality 160, 14n4
prohairesis see decision
proof, in dialectical inquiry 12
property: v. universal 41, 143–4, 12n48; v. particular form 143
proprium see special property
Protagoras: on chance 217; on change 120; and Heracleitus 9n23;
on history of philosophy 8n6; on perception 172, 14n31; and
PNC 102; on potentiality 123; reply to 2, 103; v. scepticism 84,
102, 9n20; and science of being 102
Protagorean, revised 104, 9n33
proximate see cause, matter
prudence 180; in vicious person 205
psychology: and ﬁrst philosophy 256, 259; in ethics and politics 234,
241, 252, 258
punishment, and justice 20n10
puzzle (aporia) 7, 58; in dialectic 12, 18, 20–1, 24, 94; empirical v.
dialectical 21, 2n19, 2n56; in ethics 184; explanation of 23; and
ﬁrst principles 26; genuine 14, 20, 2n54; importance of 2n76;

about justice 236; in Metaphysics 8; methodological 106; in
political theory 16n16; and preliminary questions 90, 236; and
scepticism 90; solution of 22, 91, 116, 140, 151, 153, 192, 2n77;
soul 9; about substance 109–11; about universal science 87–9
Pythagoreans 85, 13n10, 13n29
qua 91, 162, 8n43, 13n21
quality 41, 44, 3n30; v. differentia 33; v. form 5n8; multivocal 3n31;
peculiar 12n47; v. relative 38; v. substance 30; types of 3n32
quantity 32, 3n40
questions, and categories 3n7
random processes, rejected 37
rational agency 177, 191, 212, 217; and capacities 195; in city 219;
and deliberation 178; and ethical argument 192; and freedom
220–1; and friendship 211, 217, 221, 18n11; and good 175,
179; and happiness 196; and human function 194; and human
soul 183, 202, 206; and justice 232; and persons 182; and
private property 250; and responsibility 181, 199; and stable
character 203; and time 180; and virtue 200, 204, 241, 248, 253
rational control, scope 206
rational discourse 215
rational part of soul 194
rationalism, on intuition 78
realism 2, 3n5; and Aristotle's method 25; and dialectic 77;
difﬁculties for 7; and empiricism 17; in ethics 9, 184–5, 16n20;
in ﬁrst philosophy 8; and foundationalism 17, 71; metaphysical
52, 62–3, 65, 69, 73,

GENERAL INDEX

78, 81, 83, 101, 104, 145, 257, 260, 1n10, 9n19; naïve 10, 17, 25, 172,
2n2; v. nominalism 41, 4n11, 10n46, 12n51, 12n52; about
perception 163–4, 14n24, 14n29, 14n31; and political argument
189; v. Protagoras 84; and scepticism 4; and thought 14n44;
about universals see universals
reason: and belief 168; and perception 172
reason, practical 183, 211–12; and appearance 180; v. appetite 178;
correct, in virtue 207; and desire 174–6, 200, 15n4; extension of
215, 217; in friendship 214; life of v. life of feeling 201; roles
238; and teleology 194; value of 204; and vice 203, 205
reasonable (eulogon) 16, 2n28
redirecting (metabibazein) see dialectic
regret 203, 17n12
relative 38, 44, 4nn1–2, 4n6
relativity, in Protagorean position 104
responsibility: and contribution 182; essential to human beings 183;
legal, not Aristotle's concern 182; and rational agency 181; and
virtue 199; v. voluntary action 182
rich and poor, conﬂict 218, 244, 21n45
right (to deon), and ﬁne 21n4
scepticism: and conﬂicting appearances 102; and dialectic 21; about
ethics 184; about external objects 9n22; on history of
philosophy 84, 262, 8n6; and justiﬁcation 78; and puzzles 90;
radical 104; v. realism 2, 4; reply to 105; and science of being
104; about senses 165; about virtues 237
science 88, 92; autonomy of 77; and causes 83; common principles
81; demonstrative 4, 79, 6n3; demonstrative, not universal
8n23; v. dialectic 8, 62, 71, 79, 82, 85; difﬁculties in Aristotle's
conception 81; and essence 8, 63–5, 93; and explanation 147;
and justiﬁcation 62; and necessity 63; non-demonstrative 88,
93, 97, 106, 8n51, 9n2; objects of 8; and particulars 63, 142;
and perception 63; and philosophy 6; and principles 18, 24, 34,
66, 83; priority in 67; and realism 65; second-order 86, 90, 92,
96, 106, 146, 8n50; subject of 92; and universals 63, 141, 144
science of being 4, 99, 8n42; and dialectic 8n59, 8n60; v. Protagoras
102; and scepticism 104
science, universal 5–8, 8, 83, 86, 92, 7n14, 7n18, 7n19; arguments
97; challenged 77; and demonstration 91, 93; and dialectic
94–5; and four causes 85; method of 88; object of 92;
possibility of 91; puzzles about 87–8; and second-order
questions 94; and substance 7; tasks of 96
self: another 210–12, 214, 217; concern for 201–2, 211; and essence
202; and intellect 18n9
self-evidence 23, 62, 72, 73, 75, 77, 94, 105; of appearances 17; not
obvious to everyone 78; of principles 7n9
self-love 203, 208, 212; and altruism 210; and conception of oneself
237; and private property 250; and self-conﬁned interests
250–1
self-realization 187, 208, 211, 212, 214–15, 217, 221, 18n4; and
external goods 205; and ﬁnal good 197, 16n33; in friendship
196; and self-love 203, 206; and virtue 204, 239, 241
self-sacriﬁce 208, 240, 21n52; rejected 232; and self-concern 203
self-sufﬁciency (autarkeia) 185, 217, 18n12; of city 220; and
friendship 227; of good 191–3, 208, 16n35, 16n36; and leisure
19n13; see also happiness
sense see perception
sense, common 166, 14n38

699

senses, distinction 14n18
sense of word 6, 3n9
separability 107–8, 12n12; in account 139; of compound 135; of
material compound 144; of matter 112, 12n26; and parts 138;
of substance 113, 115, 10n8
Shakespeare 11n5, 11n27
signiﬁcation 36, 3n4, 4n12; and PNC 98, 9n3, 9n5, 9n8
slave: and city 180; lacks deliberation and decision 216, 220;
freedom promised to 19n21; natural, interest of 19n21; rule
over 19n12; see also free
slavery v. freedom 225; justice of 190
slavish character 222, 227, 239, 246, 249, 17n18, 19n16, 19n20,
19n23; dependence on others 220; friendship 226
snub 129–30, 10n40
Socrates: on deﬁnition 27; and dialectic 3, 1n13; on incontinence
21; on virtue 17n16
Socrates the Younger 130, 133, 155–6, 11n41
Socratic dialogues, and dialectic 76
Solon 19n20, 21n24, 21n33
sophia see wisdom
sophistical argument 117
soul: as actuality 152, 13n37; of animal see animal; as attunement
150–1, 153, 13n12; and body 152, 155, 13n17, 13n33; as cause
151; as common property 150; common beliefs about 153; and
consciousness 153;

700

GENERAL INDEX

deﬁnition of 158, 13n45; different types 150, 153, 13n45; and
dualism 150, 155, 160; as efﬁcient cause 153; as essence 183; in
ethics 207; as explanatory principle 154; and ﬁrst philosophy
172; as form 132, 135, 141, 150–1; relation to heart and brain
155; hierarchy 158; and homonymy 150, 157; human see
human being; as immaterial component 155; and immortality
155; as incorporeal 153, 13n8; as material stuff 150; and
materiate form 12n7; and mind 158; nutritive 151, 158–9, 180,
13n7, 13n25; particular 137, 153, 13n26; parts of 173, 194, 200,
14n19, 15n2; perishable 12n1; persistence through time 150;
and person 153; and physiology 157; plant 180; plants 13n7;
puzzles about 150; rational 180, 186, 200; sailor and ship,
analogy 13n37; as subject 156; as substance 9, 151, 13n22; and
teleology 155, 157–8, 172, 183; types 13n3; unity of organism
150–1
Spartans 19n3, 19n19, 19n30, 20n16, 21n22, 21n43
special property (idion) 32, 38, 3nn38–9, 3n47; necessary for
substance 10n7
species 41; ﬁxity 58, 5n25; and form 12n13, 12n36; and genera
12n41; and qualitative difference 12n17; and substance 28–30,
41–3, 144; and substance of particulars 140; and universal
12n35, 12n40
stability, and virtue 202, 207
Stoics: on freedom 19n14; on happiness and virtue 221; on peculiar
quality 12n47; on perception and assent 172, 14n51; on virtue
17n16
strong predication 28, 32, 33, 38–9, 42, 46, 3n27, 3n37, 4n29; see also
inherence
subject 38; bare 9n12, 10n27; basic 39, 114, 128, 134, 138, 139, 140,
145, 147; basic, and explanation 64; of change 37, 40, 45, 103,
123, 3n35, 9n27, 9n28, 11n3; and essence 99, 102, 114, 118,
132; and form 112; genuine 108, 6n11; of growth 137; and
knowledge 107; v. material body 127; matter as 53, 112; matter,
form, and compound 135; necessary conditions for 101; and
PNC 98, 9n5; and potentiality 127; primary 113, 120; primary,
identical to its essence 117; v. properties 145; and science 92,
97–8, 104; and signiﬁcation 9n8; soul as 156; types of 113
subjectivism, about perception 164; v. Protagoras 102; rejected 8
substance (ousia): as actuality 121; Aristotle's early theory 7; and
being qua being 95, 107; candidates 7, 109; and cause 128; in
change 31; and contraries 27, 3n65; degrees of 139; and
Eleatics 3n57; and essence 28, 32, 107, 134, 5n10, 9n10, 10n10;
and explanatory properties 65, 119; focal connexion 139, 144;
and form see form; immaterial , and soul 148, 151–2; and
material subject 134; and matter 47, 85, 112–13, 12n26; matter,
form, and compound as 113; multivocity of 109–11, 10n14,
10n16; and natural kinds 64; non-sensible 8n30, 10n31;
particular 107, 114, 141–2, 212; particular as primary 145;
particular and universal 144; and particular form 135, 139;
parts of 12n32; perishable 89; and PNC 99; and potentiality 8,
120; and preliminary questions 111; Presocratics on 92; priority
107–8, 112; priority to non-substance 41; priority to nonsubstance particulars 108; puzzles about 8, 89, 106, 109, 111,
116; v. quality 30; and science of being 83; second, 38, 54 3n5;
separability 107–8, 113, 115, 10n7, 10n8; and soul see soul; as
subject 28, 38, 42, 85, 107, 110, 134, 4n31, 5n10, 8n12, 9n10;
and teleology 60; as this 113, 115, 5n8; and universal science 7,

88, 8n26, 12n52; and ‘What is it?’ question 108, 114, 3n36; as
whole 192
substance, criteria for 7, 28, 109; and being qua being 111; essencecriterion 42, 111, 113, 144; favour form 144; and particular
forms 138; predication-formula 110, 112, 115, 118, 138, 140,
148, 10n17; subject-criterion 8, 42, 47–8, 64–5, 111, 113, 115,
140
substance, ﬁrst 26, 39, 139, 3n26; criterion 64; form 60;
independence of 43, 4n21; priority of 42, 4n21, 4n23; v. second
28, 8n31; and strong predication 29; as subject 46
such, v. this 41
sumbebêkos see coincident
syllable 155
syllogism, demonstrative 66; dialectical 18; v. induction 15; practical
15n16
synonymy 27
teleion see complete
teleological theories of ethics 229, 232, 236
teleology see cause, ﬁnal
temperance 204; v. insensibility 206; and private property 250; and
restraint 238
theology, and universal science 8n42
theoretical study, and happiness 18n24
theory, and dialectic 22; evaluation of 16, 23; formation of 15

GENERAL INDEX

theses see dialectic
Third Man 140, 10n44
this (tode ti) 41, 48, 4n13, 10n34; and compound 12n33; and
deﬁnition 115; and form 120, 151, 5n8, 12n33; v. heap 12n30;
and matter 135, 138, 12n31; includes non-substances 5n8; as
particular 117, 3n19, 12n2, 12n3; separable in account 139; as
subject 134; as substance 113, 109, 115, 10n12, 12n26; v. such
3n30; and universal 140; and ‘What is it?’ question 114; as
whole 138
thought 9, 169; and appearance 168; no bodily organ 13n36, 14n45;
content and structure of 171; and formulae of perception
14n44; and inference 170; and life 211; relation to perception
172; and universals 14n44
Thrasymachus, on justice 185, 213, 217, 244
ti ên einai see essence
time: perception of 166, 178; and rational agency 180, 191, 195
tode ti see this
Topics, function of 3
trading partnerships 223
truth 62; and appearance 168; as correspondence to reality 2, 52,
63, 69, 82, 145; v. falsehood, in appearance and perception 171;
and perception 168
tuchê see luck
tyranny 246, 19n12; different views 20n17; and law 21n16; power
of 218; vice in 248
understanding (nous) 74; and intuition 7n7; and principles 7n8,
16n3; roles of 7n3
unity: and form 155; of form and matter 127; genuine 139; and
indivisibility 4n32, 4n34; numerical 31, 41, 45, 48, 117, 175,
10n35, 10n43, 12n14; numerical v. speciﬁc 3n20, 12n27, 12n36;
and soul 150–1, 153; of soul and body 152, 13n17; and
teleology 153; of whole 147, 153, 192
universals 41; animals lack 177; v. classes 41; criteria for 28, 117,
4n11, 4n16–17, 6n5, 12n35, 12n40, 12n46; dependent statue
4n20; v. essence of particular 140, 12n38; existence of 89;
expressions for 3n22; formal 130; grasp of 170; imperishable
4n14; and induction 15; instantiation of 41, 43, 4n15–16;
intrinsic properties 63; and knowledge 89; materiate 129,
134–5, 5n20; and particular, in dialectic 22; v. particular person
212; v. particulars 42, 89; particulars 42; plural instances 141,
143, 12n37, 12n44; and PNC 99; as principles 8n29; priority of
141, 145; v. properties 41, 43, 143–4; realism, v. nominalism
141, 144, 3n5, 6n4, 10n46, 12n51, 12n52; and science 63, 141,
144; as secondary substances 144; separated 89; and substance
140–1, 144, 12n52; as suches 3n33; v. thises 140, 4n13; and
thought 169, 14n44; and understanding 7n3
upbringing, importance 184
usual (hôs epi to polu) 57, 5n17; in ethics 16n3; not mere uniformity
5n20
utilitarianism 229
vice: and aggression 245; and conﬂict 203, 244; and external goods
205; political aspects 242; in political systems 248; and regret
203; and slavishness 246; sources of 241; and special injustice
229
vices, connexions between 239
village 215
virtue (aretê), virtues: of character, and happiness 224; of character,

701

general features 237; and character sketches 21n2; and city 218;
and common good 219; v. conative account of good 193;
requires decision 181, 15n27; degrees of 204; eudaimonic and
moral 199, 203, 204, 208, 211, 237, 240; and external goods
204, 239–40; and the ﬁne 185, 199, 237; and friendship 211;
and function 207; of good man and good citizen 219, 248,
19n11; and habituation 207; and happiness 189, 192, 196, 199,
240, 241, 17n2; and human function 194; in political systems
21n47; inﬂexibility 241; inseparability 237; and justice 237,
20n1; as mean state 200; moral, and common good 228; moral,
and altruism 208, 213; nameless 207, 17n23; and nature
199–200, 207; non-rational desire 204; and non-rational desires
200, 204, 238; in political systems 188; political v. philosophical
189; and political stability 248; as potentiality 200; and rational
desire 200, 207; v. regret 203; and responsibility 199; and selfrealization 204; self-regarding 204, 217; social 239; stability
202, 207; voluntary 230
virtuous action: chosen for its own sake 181, 213; and happiness
218; and leisure 220
voice 215
voluntary action 220, 15n32, 21n3; and praise and blame 181; and
responsibility 182
wealth: attitudes to 205; v. aim of city 250; and poverty, effects 243,
249, 21n45; right attitude to

702

GENERAL INDEX

206; and vice 241; and virtue 222
‘What is it?’ question 30, 32; and categories 3n8, 3n21; and
differentia 33; v. quality 3n30; and substance 108, 114, 3n36;
and this 114
whole 12n8; v. heap 138, 192; v. part 217, 225, 18n12; unity of 147
wife, and husband 180
wisdom (phronêsis): grasps end 17n6; and ﬁnal good 179; and justice
213; and the mean 200; and political science 20n1; in political
system 248; and virtue 228, 237
wisdom (sophia) 83; v. scepticism 84; as universal science 8n24
wish (boulêsis): and conception of good 15n22; and rational
appearance 179; as rational desire 174
women, inferiority 190
words, senses of 9n5; and homonymy 27
worth, and justice 230, 233

